# 00 02 Preface 2nd Ed

Preface to Second Edition
Since  was first published in 1963 a very great deal has been written about seventeenthand eighteenth-century Italian art (though much less about the social and economic history of the period) and as my own interests have sometimes strayed from the field, I have certainly not been able to keep abreast of all new developments. However, although many of the emphases in  would necessarily be very different were I now writing the book for the first time, I have the impression that there has not appeared any radically different interpretation of the whole period and that there has only been published one criticism of it so substantial that I feel the need to discuss it at some length.
I have, therefore, thought it best to respond to the challenge of a new edition in three separate ways. I have corrected in the text itself such errors of fact and judgement (as well as misprints) as can be altered without difficulty—a process which I began in.the Italian edition of 1966.1 have in a new introduction tried to face the specific problem to which I have just referred. And, rather than incorporate new material into the substance of the book itself and thus seriously distort the structure of the original narrative, I have in a postscript devoted an extended commentary to those new publications, or publications newly seen by me, which have a direct bearing on its theme—and where possible I have estimated as fairly as I can the impact made by this new material on my original arguments. In this section I have not aimed to mention works, however intrinsically important, on the art of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries which are not immediately relevant to my purpose, and this has meant the conscious exclusion of many significant monographs. Nor have I made references to the excellent Dizionario biografico degli Italiani which has begun appearing over the last few years because I have taken it for granted that anyone interested in the figures
I describe will want to make use of it as, like some noble glacier, it slowly moves down the alphabet. I am, however, all too aware that I will have omitted many other contributions that should have been included, and for this I apologise both to the authors concerned and to the readers of this new edition. For the sake of convenience
I have divided my commentary according to the original chapters, and the publications mentioned in the notes to it have been incorporated into a new bibliography covering the whole book. The index also has been revised to take this additional material into account.
By far the most gratifying part of what has necessarily been a difficult and somewhat tendentious labour of revision has been the discovery of how many pictures which in 1963 were only known to me from documentary sources have subsequently come to light, and I am very happy to be able to add reproductions of a number of these to my original illustrations.

[Page vi]
I am deeply grateful to the directors of Chatto and Windus (and especially to
Mrs Norah Smallwood) for the constant support and encouragement I received from them when we worked together on the first handsome edition of this book. And I would also like to thank John Nicoll for proposing a new edition and for giving me so much help over it. Robert Enggass, Howard Hibbard and especially Anthony Blunt stand out among the many people who have pointed out to me some of my more glaring mistakes, and I am most grateful to them as well as to Bruce Boucher, Marco
Chiarini, Aim Sutherland Harris, Pierre Rosenberg and Marianne Roland-Michel for suggestions in the preparation of my bibliography and illustrations and for help in many other ways.
One special cause of sadness has marred my satisfaction in preparing this new edition: the deaths of Tim Munby and Ben Nicolson, two very close friends to whom
I turned so often for advice when writing this book, and the lack of whose assistance will certainly make itself felt in the present version.
Oxford,
November 1979

[Page 4]