# 00 03 Preface 1st Ed

Preface to First Edition
One of the problems that has caused me most trouble in preparing this book has been the choice of a suitable title. It is because the present one is so inadequate that I have found it essential to write a short explanatory preface.
For the sake of convenience I have termed ‘Baroque’ that whole phase of Italian art which came into being in Rome early in the seventeenth century, reached a climax during the pontificate of Urban VIII and lingered on in Venice until the downfall of the Republic. However, I soon saw that a mere list of the art patrons and their collections during this period would have silled much of this book and that rigorous selection was essential. Here I was faced with a vital problem of method. Should my concern with patrons be determined by the intrinsic interest of their personalities and tastes or by the quality and importance of the art they commissioned—for the two do not always coincide? Inevitably I was forced to compromise and in so doing I ran into some obvious difficulties. The chief of these was the relative amount of space to be allotted to the various figures with whom I was dealing. Every reader will see that very often
—and especially in Part 2—this bears little relation to the actual merit of the work for which they were responsible. But this is not intended to be a history of painting, and it seems to me that some men and organisations were of such importance in helping to prepare the ground for later developments, and have been so little studied, that the method I have adopted is the correct one. And by accepting a compromise I soon found a pattern which governed my general principles of selection.
The first section of the book deals entirely with Rome and, for the most part, with the pontificate of Urban VIII and the various forces that helped to mould taste during his rule. After a chapter describing the relative decline of Rome I then leave the city altogether, never to return. This decision to neglect eighteenth-century Rome was a difficult one, and it has troubled some of those who have read this book in its early stages. Yet I believe it to be justified on the grounds that no new type of patronage emerged during the earlier years of the period and that thereafter, with the dawning of neo-classicism, a different artistic style began to emerge which could not legitimately be studied in a book which is essentially concerned with the Baroque.
The whole of the middle section deals with the vacuum that resulted from the decline of Rome. In these two chapters I am concerned to show that the most significant developments in art were largely fostered by two new and very different kinds of patron from any considered in the earlier part of the book: the foreigners, who now for the first time made an overwhelming impact on Italian painters, and a number of isolated individuals in remote provincial towns who built up small collections of contemporary art. These men I believe to be important because they inherited what had been the most fruitful elements in Roman patronage—its international character and its

[Page vili]
refusal to be bound by dogmatic principles. There was, it is true, a coarsening of this inheritance, and except for Grand Prince Ferdinand of Tuscany none of them showed the delicacy and sureness of taste that had once been the glory of the great metropolitan patrons. None the less, it was their reaction against (or at least their ignorance of) contemporary, and now sterile Roman principles, and their appreciation of Neapolitan
‘anti-classical’ painting that prepared the ground for a new surge of the Baroque which spread from Venice to many parts of Europe.
The last part of the book is entirely concerned with the rise and fall of this great phase of Italian art. After the earlier chapters, in which the subject is treated in depth, I have adopted a more narrative form to show the encroachments into the Baroque of the neo-classical and other styles brought about by economic causes and new social ideas. It is because of this that in these later chapters I have gone beyond my title and have discussed architecture, sculpture and even gardens as well as painting. This was necessary because in my opinion many of the most interesting patrons of the period were deliberately turning their backs on painting since they no longer found in it a suitable medium for the expression of their ‘enlightened’ beliefs—a situation not unfamiliar in our own times. When planning this last section I was worried because the final chapters became shorter and shorter and followed each other in quick succession before petering out altogether. But this now seems to me to reflect with such perfect accuracy the actual situation of painting at the time that I decided not to manipulate the material in any other way despite its inelegant appearance.
Any attempt to ‘explain’ art in terms of patronage has been deliberately avoided.
I have also fought shy of generalisations and have tried to be severely empirical—even at the cost of shirking certain problems which have deeply interested me and which I know to be vital. Inevitably I have been forced to think again and again about the relations between art and society, but nothing in my researches has convinced me of the existence of underlying laws which will be valid in all circumstances. At times the connections between economic or political conditions and a certain style have seemed particularly close; at other times I have been unable to detect anything more than the internal logic of artistic development, personal whim or the workings of chance. I hope that the bringing together of so much material may inspire others to find a synthesis where I have been unable to do so. Nor have I gone to the opposite extreme and tried to trace or describe all the pictures to which I have referred. With few excep­
- tions the most general knowledge of an artist’s style is all that is required to appreciate the points that are made about the tastes of particular patrons.
Although my publishers have been most generous, the illustrations are far fewer ideally than I would have wished. But much care has gone into their arrangement in the hope that each Plate will in itself help to explain many of the arguments which are more laboriously elaborated in the text. Here too this has sometimes resulted in a grotesque disproportion between merit and available space, and the reluctant omission of a number of masterpieces. I am deeply grateful to my friend Dr Enzo Crea of Rome for the trouble he has taken in helping me to organise this side of the book.

[Page ix]
In writing about a subject which falls half way between History and Art History I am well aware of the risks I run in disappointing readers who are interested in either of these branches of knowledge. It is difficult to keep abreast of research in two fields, especially to-day when seventeenth-century studies are so active. But whatever the deficiencies of the final result I have no doubt whatsoever about the value of the attempt or the enjoyment I have derived from making it. Much of this enjoyment has sprung from the large number of friends I have made in Italy and England over the last few years, so many of whom have given me the most generous help.
All the libraries and archives which are referred to on a later page have received me with great kindness, and to these I would like to add especially the library of the
Warburg Institute in London where I have always received so much encouragement and advice from everyone concerned with that great organisation. I am also deeply indebted to the Provost and Fellows of my own College who have made it possible for me to undertake and continue this book over a very much longer period than they originally bargained for. Mr A. N. L. Munby, the librarian, has solved countless problems for me and Mr G. H. W. Rylands has read much of the typescript and the whole book in proof and made many suggestions and corrections. I would like, too, to thank Mrs Elizabeth Oma for the trouble she took in compiling a full and necessarily rather complicated Index; and Messrs T. and A. Constable Ltd., the printers of the book, for their great care in setting and checking my text.
I have benefited from conversations with so many people that it is impossible to thank them all and I apologise to all who have been inadvertently omitted. In Italy I would like to single out especially Dr Terisio Pignatti, who has given me such marvellous facilities for working in the Correr Library in Venice, Dr Alessandro Bettagno,
Dr Gianfranco Torcellan, Professors Franco Venturi and Gaetano Cozzi, and—above all—Professor Alessandro,Marabottini Marabotti, in whose company I have seen so many of the works discussed and whose repeated hospitality has made the writing of this book such a pleasure. In England I am especially grateful to Professor Ellis Waterhouse, Mr Denis Mahon and Mr Peter Calvocoressi, all of whom have read the typescript and greatly improved it, to Professor Nikolaus Pevsner, who first interested me in the subject of art patronage, and to Sir Anthony Blunt and Mr Michael Levey, with whom I have had so many stimulating discussions. But my greatest debt of all is to
Mr. Benedict Nicolson who has taken endless trouble with my text at every stage and whose encouraging but severe attitude has helped me more than I can express.
FRANCIS HASKELL
King’s College,
Cambridge,
July 1962

[Page 5]