# 01 CHP-1 sec i

WHEN Urban VIII became Pope,’ wrote the art-chronicler Giambattista Passeri,
Wlooking back nostalgically from the dog days of the 1670s, ‘it really seemed as if the golden age of painting had returned; for he was a Pope of kindly spirit, breadth of mind and noble inclinations, and his nephews all protected the fine arts... . 1 In fact, the long pontificate of Urban VIII which began in 1623 marked the climax of a most intensive phase of art patronage rather than the opening of a new era—the sunlit afternoon rather than the dawn. For at least thirty years the austerity and strains of the
Counter Reformation had been relaxing under the impact of luxury and enterprise.
Intellectual heresy was still stamped out wherever possible: artistic experiments were encouraged as never before or since. The rule of Urban VIII not only led to a vast increase in the amount of patronage, but also to a notable tightening of the reins.
Urban’s immediate predecessors, Paul V (1605-1621) and to a lesser extent Gregory
XV (1621-1623), had set a pattern which he was content to follow. The completing of
St Peter’s, the building and decoration of a vast palace and villa, the establishment of a luxurious family chapel in one of the important Roman churches, the support and enrichment of various religious foundations, the collection by a favoured nephew of a private gallery of pictures and sculpture—this was now the general practice. In it we can see reflected the contrasts,- and sometimes the tensions, between the Pope as a spiritual and temporal ruler and the man as an art lover and head of a proud and ambitious family.
The Popes and their nephews were by no means the only patrons, but as the century advanced their increasing monopoly of wealth and power made them at first the leaders and then the dictators of fashion. This process reached its climax in the reign of Urban
VIII and was in itself partly responsible for the relative decline in variety and experiment.
For until the election of this Pope change and revolution were of the very essence of the Roman scene. ‘. . . It [is] a strange and unnaturall thing’, wrote a correspondent to
Lord Arundell in 1620 towards the end of Paul V’s sixteen-year rule,2 ‘that in that place, contrary to all others, the long fife of the Prince is sayd to be the ruyne of the people; whose wealth consists in speedy revolutions, and oft new preparations of new hopes in those that aspire to rise by new families who, with the ould, remayne choaked

[Page 4]
with a stand, and loath to blast their future adresses by spending to court those that are dispaired of’ Exactly the same point was made with much greater force after the twenty-one years of Urban VIII’s reign.1
These ‘speedy revolutions’ and the consequent rise of new families moulded the patterns of art patronage. As successive popes came to the throne they surrounded themselves with a crowd of relatives, friends and clients who poured into Rome from all over Italy to seize the many lucrative posts that changed with each change of government. These men at once began to build palaces, chapels and picture galleries. As patrons they were highly competitive, anxious to give expression to their riches and power as quickly as they could and also to discomfort their rivals. After the Pope died they were often disgraced, and in any case their vast incomes came to a sudden end, for nepotism no longer took the form of private empires carved out of the Church’s territory. ‘There is no situation more difficult or more dangerous’, said Pope Gregory XV, who certainly knew what he was talking about,2 ‘than that of a Pope’s nephew after the death of his uncle.’ With the end of their incomes went the end of their positions as leading patrons.
It was especially noted of Cardinal Alessandro Peretti-Montalto, nephew of Pope Sixtus
V, that he was still respected and loved even after the death of that Pope, and that artists continued to work for him.3 This was evidently not the usual state of affairs.
Rome was a symbol rather than a nation. The nobles who formed the papal entourage still thought of themselves far more as Florentines, Bolognese or Venetians than as Romans or Italians; and as the prestige of painting was at its height, it was a matter of some importance for a cardinal to be able to produce several painters of distinction from his native city. We are told that Cardinal Maffeo Barberini (the future
Urban VIII) ‘was most anxious to make use of artists from his native Florence’, and that Pope Gregory XV ‘was a Bolognese so there was little chance for anyone from anywhere else... . .' The artists naturally made the most of their opportunities. In 1621
Cardinal Ludovisi was elected Pope. Domenichino had some years earlier returned to his native Bologna after a quarrel with Cardinal Borghese, but ‘this news caused him great excitement, as the new Pope was a compatriot of his and the uncle of one of his friends’, and so he hurried back to Rome where he was made Vatican architect by the Pope’s nephew Ludovico.4
Indeed, if we study the careers of the most important artists who followed Annibale
Carracci from Bologna at the beginning of the century and introduced a new style of painting to Rome, a very consistent pattern emerges. The young painter would at first be found living quarters, in a monastery perhaps, by a cardinal who had once been papal legate in his native city. Through this benefactor he would meet some influential

[Page 5]
Bolognese prelate who would commission an altar painting for his titular church and decorations for his family palace—in which the artist would now be installed. The first would bring some measure of public recognition, and the second would introduce him to other potential patrons within the circle of the cardinal’s friends. This was by far the more important step. For many years the newly arrived painter would work almost entirely for a limited group of clients, until at last a growing number of altarpieces had firmly established his reputation with a wider public and he had sufficient income and prestige to set up on his own and accept commissions from a variety of sources. Once this had been achieved, he could view the death of his patron or a change in régime with some degree of equanimity.
This essentia] pattern, which will have to be expanded and modified in later pages, determined the sites of the more significant works of modern art in Rome. There were, first, the great town and country houses, all of which—Aldôbrandini, Peretti, Borghese and so on—contained early pictures and frescoes by the Bolognese painters. Secondly, there were the churches. The most important was naturally St Peter’s, whose decoration was under the direct supervision of the Pope, but there were many others which were maintained by rich cardinals and noble families. They fall into two classes—those of which a cardinal was titular head or for which he had a special veneration; and those where he wished to be buried. Both, however, had one feature in common: their antiquity. A titular church was, by definition, one that had been handed down from cardinal to cardinal through the centuries; and in general the Popes and their families, perhaps to refute the charge of being nouveaux-riches, chose to be buried in the most ancient and venerable of basilicas such as S. Maria Maggiore and S. Maria sopra
Minerva.
There was, besides, one other way in which a noble could add to the splendour of
Rome and hope to find a suitable burying place for his family: he could build a complete new church. The demand was enormous. New Orders had sprung up to meet the threat of the Reformation—the Oratorians and the Jesuits, the Theatines, the Barnabites and the Capuchins; and the various foreign communities in Rome, the Florentines, the
Lombards and many others, vied with each other in the erection of magnificent new temples. Such building, however, takes a considerable time, and the original estimate of the cost is usually well below the final result. It is rare that the man who decides to have a church built will survive to supervise the decoration; it is still rarer that his heirs will take the same interest as he himself did. And so the chapels have to be disposed of to anyone prepared to decorate them. But the great cardinals were interested primarily in furnishing their own titular churches, family palaces or burial places in the older basilicas.
Besides, their acute sense of precedence and rivalry made them reluctant to undertake a relatively small feature in a church which had been begun by another cardinal. ‘Although it was objected to him’, we are told of Cardinal Alessandro Peretti-Montalto,1 ‘that it was not suitable for him to follow in a building [S. Andrea della Valle] which had been begun by someone else, he despised such human considerations and carried on with

[Page 6]
his plans to the glory of God... . .' Much more usually, however, the completion and decoration of new churches were carried out by wealthy but politically unimportant patrons, who were not in touch with the most modern artists of the day and who were thus compelled to fall back on well-established favourites. It is therefore paradoxically true that a well-informed traveller in about 1620 would have found that most of the best modern paintings in Rome were in the oldest churches.

**Footnotes:**
1 Ameyden, Relatione della città di Roma 1642-—MS. 5001 in Biblioteca Casanatense, Rome. Piety, says the author, diminished under Urban VIII because of the excessive length of the papacy ‘non per colpa alcuna del Prencipe, ma che la nascita del Pontificato elettivo, et ecclesiastico ricerca mutazione più spesso, acciò molti possono godere de gli onori, e dignità ecclesiastiche, ricerche, c cariche della corte’.
2 Quoted by Felici, p. 321.
3 Passeri, p. 27.
4 ibid., pp. 44 and 132
1 Panciroli, p. 800, quoted by Ortolani.
1 See many references in Pascoli—I, p. 93, and II, pp. 119, 332, 417, 435, etc.
3 Montalto, p. 295, for the important evidence of Alessandro Vasalli, a painter who testified on Mola’s behalf in his troubles with Prince Pamfili: ‘Io so che quando una persona di qualche professione è arrollato tra la famiglia de’ Principi e tra Virtuosi de Principi con assegnamento di pane sono obbligati a preferir qualche Prince o Princess per ogni loro operazione, ma però pagandoglieli le sue opere quello che vagliono e perciò non è obbligato a servire quel Prince con la sua Professione, senza una mercede, o salario, ma come ho detto deve preferire quel Prince ad ogni altro per il tenor dela loro professione e questo lo so perchè cosi ne gli insegna la ragion naturale e per haverlo anco sentito dire tra Pittori in ordine alla Professione... . .’
3 Pascoli, II, p. 211—Cardinal Pio sent his protégé Giovanni Bonari to Florence, Bologna, Modena, Parma, Milan and Venice; ibid., II, p. 302—Cardinal Rospigliosi sent Lodovico Gimignani to Venice.
4 The appointment of Gio. Gasparo Baldoini ‘per nostro pittore’ by Cardinal Maurizio di Savoia— Baudi di Vesme, 1932, p. 23.