# 02 CHP-2 sec viii

This contribution was not as strikingly apparent as that of certain other popes. Rome itself was not transformed by Urban VIII. No great new squares recall his memory as they do those of his successors Innocent X and Alexander VII. And yet the Barberini heritage was more important than that of any other seventeenth-century dynasty, for their choice of artis ts determined the style that was to influence all future building and decorating in the city. Neither Bernini nor Pietro da Cortona had been originally
‘discovered’ by the Barberini, yet both were given their first supreme opportunities by them, and with the exception of the highly original and individual Borromini no other artist of equal stature was to appear in Rome. Their most important contribution to patronage was their quick realisation of the greatness of these men and their support of them in the most ambitious undertakings. The ease with which Camassei was dropped when his limitations were only just becoming apparent and the tenacity with which
Bernini was retained when certain of his constructional errors were threatening to overwhelm him show how certain was their sense of values.
Bernini was the genius of the age: his authority dominated all the arts and was responsible for the relative neglect of Borromini until the very end of Urban’s reign, though "the Barberini showed on occasion that they admired his talents.4 It is doubtful whether the relationship between an artist and his patrons has ever been more fruitful.
For Bernini and the Barberini had much in common: a remarkable width of culture,

[Page 62]
a deep respect for the past, a combination of real religious feeling with dramatic ostentation—above all the most strenuous ambition. The confidence between them allowed Bernini to experiment fully with his talent, but while working for Urban he never gave rein to that introspection and mysticism that characterise some of his later sculpture. Compared to the relationship between those two tragic giants Julius II and
Michelangelo theirs was placid and free from tension. Both men were much more ready to accept the compromises of their age; both had more than a streak of worldliness.
Throughout Urban’s reign the papacy was losing power and prestige and yet it still (for the last time) appeared to be an important force in international politics. The end of the Thirty Years’ War and the arrogance of France were soon to change all that.
Meanwhile court art reached a new pitch of grandeur and flattery. Religious imagery was used to buttress secular claims, and new techniques of illusionism were devised to overwhelm the onlooker. For all its apparent optimism and opulence there is perhaps a touch of hysteria about Pietro da Cortona’s ceiling in the Barberini palace. Certainly no later pope was able to go so far in self-glorification. That was to be left to the King of France whose artist, Le Brun, adopted a modified version of Pietro’s Baroque to express it.
Even from the purely artistic point of view one of the most significant characteristics of the Barberini and their circle was the great attention paid to learning. Scholars of all kinds were welcomed at their courts and brought into contact with painters, thus giving rise to an art of great intellectual subtlety and the growth of theories which were later to be highly influential. Yet the period itself is marked by a notable freedom from dogmatism and a wide measure of variety within certain well-established limits. This was very different from the frenzied experiments of earlier years and the generally uninformed or eclectic taste of Cardinal Borghese and his friends. The Barberini were much more coherent in their opinions, but thanks to Urban’s nepotism and their own strongly individual characters, contrasting tendencies were all catered for, as the support given respectively by Cardinals Francesco and Antonio to Pietro da Cortona and Sacchi clearly testifies. When Urban VIII died everyone realised that the situation would never be the same again.