# 02 CHP-2 sec iv

All three nephews of Urban VIII, Francesco, Taddeo and Antonio, played an increasingly important role in the artistic Use of the city. Francesco was only aged 26 when his uncle was elected Pope and he himself was made Cardinal. Yet his hair was already thin and straggling at the sides, his moustache and miniature beard were growing grey, his expression was serious and a'little careworn (Plate 3a). He was universally described as an attractive and gracious character, deeply attached to literature and the arts, though not outstandingly intelligent and distinctly averse from business.2 His first crucial political test came early in 1625 when he was sent as special legate to Paris.
Richelieu’s unscrupulous policies and threatened war with Spain, which would have

[Page 44]
involved Italy, opened up a serious crisis. Francesco Barberini was instructed to propose a general armistice and above all to ensure that no concessions were made to the
Huguenots.1 The mission was a disastrous failure, but for Cardinal Barberini himself it proved of great consequence. He had set out with a brilliant retinue of friends and advisers which included the most cultivated and learned of all Italian art patrons,
Cassiano dal Pozzo. They took advantage of their social opportunities and made special visits to examine the art treasures of the Louvre and Fontainebleau.2 Everywhere they were received with extreme courtesy, and shortly before their departure they found, on returning to their apartments, a splendid gift sent by Louis XIII to sweeten their disappointment. Already hanging on the walls were seven great tapestries depicting scenes from The Lise of Constantine woven from cartoons by Rubens.3 Francesco was under strict instructions from his uncle not to accept gifts, and so he turned them down.
It must have been a difficult decision for him—too difficult, indeed, to last for long, and soon afterwards he changed his mind and accepted the tapestries. His art collecting had certainly begun well.
But he took back with him from Paris more than a series of masterpieces by Rubens.
He was even more struck than his uncle before him by the vitality of French culture, which was now very much richer and more complex than it had been twenty years earlier. Political rebuffs in no way diminished these feelings. From now on, until the end of his days, French writers, scientists, artists and thinkers of all kinds, were welcomed by him and corresponded with him. Indeed, hardly had he returned to Rome in December 1625, after nine months abroad, when he showed the first signs of these sympathies.
He bought a picture of The Capture of Jerusalem by the Emperor Titus from the young
Nicolas Poussin, who had arrived from Paris eighteen months earlier and had been introduced by Giambattista Marino to Barberini’s friend Marcello Sacchetti.4
Another diplomatic mission followed almost immediately—this time to Madrid.
It was an equal failure, and when the Cardinal returned to Rome in October 1626 he was to remain there, immensely rich and influential, indubitably the leading citizen but with little independent power of any real significance. Thereafter riches and influence were used largely to promote the arts, sciences and learning to which he was so devoted. His court became the centre of artistic and intellectual life in the city; he himself began to make an important impact on the great achievements which already marked the new reign.
His first serious opportunity came with the commissions for a whole series of new altarpieces for St Peter’s. All over Italy, but especially in Florence and Rome, artists and their protectors were competing with each other for the great opportunities that now arose. The committee was being bombarded with letters; lists were being drawn

[Page 45]
up and amended; discussions were frequent.1 The most influential member had hitherto been the extremely cultivated Cardinal del Monte, ever on the lookout for fresh talent.
During the course of 1624 and early in the next year he had obtained commissions for
Simon Vouet and the still virtually unknown Andrea Sacchi.2 Now his position began to be eclipsed by the arrival of Francesco Barberini, who joined the committee on becoming Cardinal. Even before leaving for Paris, Francesco had tentatively made his first proposal—the ordering of an important picture to represent Christ in the Boat calming His Disciples from the well-established and persistent Lanfranco, who had written to him applying for the task.3 On his return from this diplomatic mission Cardinal
Barberini began to take a more decided and adventurous line. This was not altogether easy. The committee was especially keen to get paintings from the older generation of artists, notably the Bolognese, who had so distinguished themselves during the previous reigns. Indeed Cardinal Ginnasi, the chairman, was determined that the most important picture of all should be given to Guido Reni, and he asked the Legate in
Bologna to approach the artist.4 Francesco Barberini had to content himself with the offer of a smaller picture to Pietro da Cortona. After some months of negotiation and many advance payments Guido came to Rome; but after a short stay he left in a sudden fury brought on partly by what he considered to be the humiliating control that the committee insisted on exerting.5 Cardinal Barberini had welcomed him warmly, but he was ready to seize the opportunity offered by the important rearrangement that now became necessary. He at once suggested that the main picture should be given to Pietro da Cortona, and that the one originally intended for him should be given instead to
Nicolas Poussin.6 The proposal was accepted, and thus through his efforts and those of
Cardinal del Monte the three young artists of neo-Venetian tendencies encouraged by the Sacchetti, Cassiano dal Pozzo and the Barberini themselves made their first crucial appearances in the most important church in Rome side by side with world renowned artists of an earlier generation. From now on their triumph was complete, and the
Cardinal’s introduction of Pietro da Cortona and Sacchi into the Capuchin church being built by his uncles was an obvious and foregone conclusion.
Francesco bought for his own private collection one or two other works by Poussin
—a Samson, which has disappeared, and The Death of Germanicus, a picture in which, despite the magniloquence of individual figures, the composition already seems to anticipate the austerity and classicism which the artist adopted in later years. It was probably just this tendency which discouraged the young Cardinal. On only one further occasion did he approach Poussin—for a second version of The Capture of ferusalem by the Emperor Titus, painted some dozen years or so after the first. Once again

[Page 46]
Barberini almost immediately gave the picture away to a foreign dignitary.1 For his own taste was diverging more and more from the severity of his archaeologist friend
Cassiano dal Pozzo. He himself preferred the more lush and showy. He patronised other French artists, Simon Vouet and Valentin, who lacked the fine restraint that
Poussin later developed, and he paid much less attention to Andrea Sacchi, who after an early Baroque manner was increasingly turning to Raphael and Roman classicism for inspiration.
Both Valentin and Vouet had come strongly under the influence of Caravaggio, and the patronage of Cardinal Francesco and his friends, Marcello Sacchetti, Cassiano dal Pozzo and others, encouraged both artists to adopt a more florid, lighter, Baroque style in keeping with the grandiose history paintings that they were now required to produce. Valentin found the break much harder, and a huge Allegory of Rome represented rather , an awkward attempt to use his Caravaggesque manner on an essentially unsuitable theme (Plate i).2 Vouet’s talent was by nature more decorative and by the time he left Rome in 1627 he was already foreshadowing the grand manner which he then introduced into France.3 Both enjoyed highly successful careers through the backing of Cardinal Francesco, culminating in altarpieces for St Peter’s.4 But their adoption by the Barberini circle effectively put an end to the direct influence of Caravaggio on Roman art.
Francesco’s great opportunity to display his patronage and taste on a really large scale came with the decoration of the family palace. In 1625, during the short interval between his embassies to Paris and Madrid, he had bought the palace of Alessandro
Sforza, duca di Segni, on the Quirinal. Shortly afterwards, on leaving for Spain, he gave it to one of his younger brothers, Taddeo.
- vTaddeo was at once the weakest and the most brutal of the Barberini. He lacked the
Two other paintings by Poussin can be associated with the Barberini family—the Landscapes with St
Matthew and with St John (Berlin and Chicago), the former of which came from the Barberini palace.
Sir Anthony Blunt (Exposition Poussin, pp. 100 and 102) suggests that they are the first two of a series of
Four Evangelists interrupted by the fall of the Barberini. It is also possible that the Virgin protecting the city of Spoleto at Dulwich (ibid, p. 78) may have been painted for Francesco who was Bishop of that city.
On 27 June 1642 Poussin wrote from Paris to thank Cassiano dal Pozzo ‘che mi dà occasione di servire l’Eminentiss. Sig. Cardinal Barberino del disegno dell’istoria di Scipione’ and asked him to convey his thanks also to the Cardinal ‘dell’onore, che mi fa, di ricordarsi di me, e per pregarla di accettare quello per signo di tributo della mia servitù.’—Correspondance, pp. 165-6. This may be related to the drawing at Windsor, apparently from Poussin’s studio, of Scipio and the pirates published by Blunt, 1945, p. 43.

[Page 47]
intellectual resources of his elder and younger brothers and he was quite unable to cope with the overpowering position that his uncle planned for him. He was only 20 when
Urban VIII became Pope, and he was then described as being ‘all sugar, all honey’.1
Within three years he was involved in a street brawl and a savage murder. A papal pardon, phrased so widely that it covered any interpretation put on the events that had occurred, settled that, but the deterioration in lais character continued.2 He was again and again the centre of trouble and even violence, yet on every such occasion there was someone to comment that it was not really his fault and that his only ambition was to live quietly—if splendidly.3 And indeed only a very strong character could have withstood the temptations that were deliberately put in his way. For it was his role to sire a great new dynasty as important as any in Europe—the Barberini. In 1627 he was made to marry a devout and simple daughter of the Colonna, one of the oldest and most aristocratic Roman families. At about the same time he was appointed lieutenant-general of the papal armies under the supreme command of his father, whom he succeeded, and two years later his own nobility was assured by the purchase of the principality of Palestrina. In 1631 he was given the archaic title of Prefect of Rome, a post which had belonged until their extinction to the Della Rovere, the dukes of
Urbino. His annual income was among the highest in the whole of Italy.
From the first the Pope was determined that Taddeo should assert his rights as vigorously as possible. The Prefecture of Rome was virtually obsolescent. It was now revived in all its authority. Dubious claims of absolute precedence on ceremonial occasions were strongly pressed—and as strongly resisted. For foreign embassies resented the humiliations which they felt were being imposed on them. The chronicles of the time are filled with accounts of the diplomatic incidents that followed. Torn between his natural laziness and the arrogance that was expected of him, Taddeo alternatively backed out or resorted to violence. Against his inclination he was turned into a public figure.4
Such was the man to whom in 1626 Francesco Barberini handed over the palace of the Sforzas, a family which was compelled a few years later to sell its property at
Valmontone to the same purchaser. From the first the Barberini intended to have a new palace built on a much larger scale than the existing structure, part of which it was proposed to incorporate into the new scheme.5 Taddeo continued to buy surrounding land and approached Carlo Maderno, the leading architect in Rome (Bernini had as yet onlyTestored S. Bibiana), who had already been in the service of the Pope. Maderno or—more likely—some brilliant collaborator or adviser departed completely from the

[Page 48]
tradition of the sixteenth-century Roman palace. The courtyard was abandoned and replaced by a deep forecourt so that the main façade is approached through projecting wings at each end. This façade was then split up into seven bays of arcades three storeys high of which the bottom one forms an open loggia (Plate 9). From being a grim fortress, however grandiose, of the traditional type, the palace now turned into a light, welcoming country-house—indeed precedents for façades of this kind were to be found almost only in the villas scattered round Rome. Yet as a country house it was vast. It was certainly the largest private palace in the city and symbolised the fact that the Barberini were absolutely sure of themselves and of their complete supremacy over all rivals—a supremacy moreover based on money rather than arms. A new era had dawned.
Maderno died in 1629, and was at once replaced by Bernini, who with the help of his predecessor’s assistant Francesco Borromini made a few modifications but kept to the main lines of the plan. By 1633—an astonishingly short time—the palace was virtually complete. Already the decoration was well under way.
Of all the Barberini, Taddeo was least interested in the arts. Unlike his uncle and brothers he had no special favourites among the talented group of painters, sculptors and architects who were creating the new Baroque style. There was, however, ready to advise him a family which had long enjoyed a special relationship with the raw, rich and art-loving popes of the seventeenth century. The Bentivoglio came from Ferrara, where they had for centuries been one of the most distinguished families.1 When in
1598 the city had devolved to the papacy, the principal member Ippolito had made a last desperate attempt to maintain its independence by supporting the rather dubious claims of Cesare d’Este to the succession.2 His younger brothers Guido and Enzo saw their duty in a different light. They rallied to the Church’s cause and consequently reaped all the benefits that poured from a Pope anxious to appease the local nobility.
Guido, a man of wide culture and very real ability, enjoyed an exceedingly successful career in the Church. In 1621 he was made Cardinal after having served as Nunzio in
Flanders and Paris over the previous fourteen years—missions which strongly influenced his tastes and political sympathies and provided him with the material for his very popular historical writings. Enzo served for a time as ‘ambassador’ from Ferrara to
Rome—a post specially created by the Pope to satisfy local sensibilities.
Both men were extremely fond of art, and showed a fine and adventurous taste.
Early in 1623 Guido had his portrait painted by Van Dyck, who wonderfully rendered the sensitive, alert, powerful and ascetic features of a figure who seems to have strayed from another age, at once tougher and more spiritual, than that of the Barberini (Plate 4a).3 Indeed he surprised his friends at Court by the relative austerity of his Use4—

[Page 49]
relative because for a number of years he lived in the great Borghese palace on the
Quirinal, decorated by Guido Reni, Tassi, Gentileschi and others which his brother
Enzo bought in 1619 and which the family was forced to sell some years before Guido’s death.1 There he amassed a notable collection—there was a Van Dyck Crucifixion besides the portrait2—and became one of the first admirers of the young landscape painter Claude Lorrain, whose success was partly assured through his patronage.3
Indeed, he introduced Claude to the Pope, who at once commissioned two pictures of fanciful and genre scenes and then asked for a further two to record his fortifications at
Santa Marinella and his country house at Castel Gandolfo—themes which the artist treated in a romantically vague manner rather than literally as Urban had perhaps hoped.4
It was no doubt this aspect of Claude’s painting that made a special appeal to Cardinal
Bentivoglio. Deeply involved in the intrigues of court Use, he evidently felt at his ease with artists, especially those who could satisfy his love of colour and poetry. A letter from the Florentine painter Giovanni da San Giovanni who had been sent by Enzo to help to decorate the palace gives us a vivid impression of the Cardinal taking the artist round the ground-floor apartments and exclaiming, ‘Giovanni, here on these unfinished vaults I want you to paint sea monsters and sirens engaged in battles in the water.’ The artist obliged with three scenes full of vigorous fancy and colour depicting the Rapes of Proserpina, Amphitrite and Europa.5
Ever since the beginning of the century the BentivogUo brothers had been helping succeeding popes with the purchase of the finest old masters and the employment of contemporary artists. Enzo Bentivoglio had shown no hesitation—indeed he had resorted to deliberate trickery—in helping to despoil his native Ferrara for the benefit of Scipione Borghese. In 1608 he had procured some of the finest Dosso Dossis in the
Ducal collection for that Cardinal’s gallery.6 Under Gregory XV he had been put in charge of the decoration of the various Ludovisi palaces.’ Now under Urban VIII it was to him that the uncertain Taddeo turned.
The frescoes by Tassi and Gentileschi were painted in 1611 and 1612 when it still belonged to Scipione
Borghese, and Passeri is therefore wrong when he writes (p. 125) that they were produced for Bentivoglio.
The Bentivoglio sold the palace to the Lante family, from whom it was acquired by Cardinal Mazarin— see Chapter 7, p. 183, note 2.

[Page 50]
One of the artists employed by the Bentivoglio and living in the palace was a young Umbrian follower of Domenichino, Andrea Camassei, who had been suggested to the Marchese by the somewhat elusive landscape painter Filippo Napoletano.1
There he had decorated a room with scenes from the story of Cupid and Psyche which proved an instant success. The Bentivoglio accordingly recommended him to the
Barberini and at about the same time he began working for the Sacchetti. The process was by now a familiar one, and his career seemed assured.
Camassei was at once given two ceiling frescoes to paint in small rooms in the new palace, representing God creating the Angels and Parnassus with Apollo "and the Muses, the
Fates, and Heroes approaching the Temple of Immortality. Like so much else in the palace, the combination of subjects was original and complex, but in a very vague way both of them foreshadowed some of the themes of the much larger scheme of decoration that was to follow. For among the hierarchy of angels brought into being by God two classes especially were singled out—those with crowns who protected provinces and kingdoms, and those with sceptres who assisted their rulers, thus symbolising the divine sanction given to the sovereigns of this world. The Parnassus contained more obvious references to the Barberini as protectors of civilisation and the arts. Apollo is crowned with laurel and his harp marked with the ubiquitous bee to identify him with the poet-Pope, and the Heroes who approach the Temple of Immortality on one side were soon interpreted as representing his ancestors. Both frescoes, painted in a dignified if flaccid classical style, were much admired, and great hopes were held out to Camassei.2 Meanwhile another much finer artist of somewhat similar tendencies was introduced into the palace.
The claims of Andrea Sacchi had already been pressed by Cardinal Francesco
Barberini in St Peter’s. Now he was given his first large-scale work and was required to fresco the vault of one of the main reception rooms (Plate 12). The theme chosen was
Divine Wisdom, derived from the Apocryphal Wisdom of Solomon, a subject not hitherto represented in art, but which, it was explained, was ‘suitable for the majestic palace of the Barberini because it meant that as that fortunate family had been born and chosen to rule the Church in the place of God, so it did so with the aid of divine wisdom which it both loved and revered’.3 There is no indication as to which of the Roman theologians chose the theme—it seems almost inconceivable that the artist himself could have been responsible for such a far-fetched idea. It was, in any case, as
Sacchi must have been well aware, the most ambitious project to represent an abstract
'philosophical concept since Raphael’s frescoes in the Vatican Stanze. The Biblical text on which the fresco was based called upon princes ‘to honour Wisdom that ye may reign for ever’. In the hands of the artist’s advisers this inevitably underwent a significant transformation. Wisdom was majestically exalted—but it was, to a large extent, identified with the particular princes who were required to honour it. For, from the breast of the female figure enthroned in the centre of the composition, there blazes

[Page 51]
forth the Sun itself. This Sun serves a double, punning purpose. On the one hand, it was a conventional emblem for Wisdom and had often been usedas such1; on the other, it was one of the three special insignia of the Barberini family. The other two—the bees and the laurel—feature prominently in the friezes of paint and stucco which surround the main fresco. Sacchi, who always found conventional flattery difficult, treated this cosmic conceit with an intellectual severity that has no parallel in decorative painting of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. It is for this reason that its true impheations have rarely been understood. Barberini-Wisdom, floating above the clouds on which are supported her attributes and manifestations (Eternity, Sanctity, Purity and so on) in the shape of beautiful maidens, is shown ordering Love and Fear to control the bestial passions of Lust and Wrath. The whole ceiling is covered with the fresco, but no attempt is made to represent the scene illusionistically. Sacchi painted his figures with great fluency in cool and subtle colours, mostly blues and greens and greys, but delineated each with the utmost care and did his best to subordinate the rather awkward groups into a composition of almost archaic simplicity. Urgency and passion played no part in his character or in the subject chosen for him, and by missing sublimity he inevitably missed too much.
In fact, his noble and austere fresco was much admired in certain circles in Rome, but within the Barberini family itself it only found one outright champion, Francesco’s younger brother Antonio, whose special contribution to patronage will be discussed on a later page. Scarcely had the scaffolding been taken down than work was begun on the decoration of a much vaster setting—the principal reception-room of the palace. The original plan had been to give this room to Camassei, Taddeo’s newly acquired protege, but after his first works in smaller rooms it became apparent that his talents were not of the order required. For the proposals for the great hall were grandiose—indeed the most spectacular that had ever been seen in a work of the kind. The Pope’s favourite poet, the Tuscan Francesco Bracciolini, was called in to devise an elaborate programme to the glory of the family, and the ceiling was clearly designed to be the greatest secular record of Barberini ambitions. With the relative failure of Camassei (only relative, for he was continually given minor commissions), one artist obviously stood out above all the rest. Pietro da Cortona’s position was firmly established and he had already been engaged on frescoes in the chapel. He was powerfully backed by Cardinal Francesco and-also by Jesuit advisers of the Pope. Some time towards the end of 1632 he began work on the great ceiling which he did not complete for another six or seven years.2
The Barberini at this time were at the very peak of their fortunes, and the programme which Francesco Bracciolini drew up and Pietro so brilliantly executed was designed as a hymn to their glory. Bracciolini, a mean character and a bad poet, had every reason to apply his flattery as intensively as possible. As a younger man he had served Maffeo Barberini as secretary for a few years and had accompanied him to

[Page 52]
Paris.1 Then, at the only critical moment in the suture Pope’s career, when Clement VIII died in 1605, Francesco Bracciolini hurriedly left him. In 1623 he was distressed to find what a mistake this had been. Frantic letters were sent to all the Barberini. ‘Now, as an old man and shorn of all pretensions,’ he wrote to Urban, ‘I only want to embrace
Your Holiness’s feet and then close my eyes.’ Fortunately for him, no one took this seriously and after the publication of his sycophantic L’elettione di Urbano VIII he was
. loaded with honours and privileges. He followed the poem with a long series, dealing with such subjects as the capture of La Rochelle and the conversion of Bulgaria, dedicated to various members of the family. But the Pope had not entirely forgiven him, for he made Bracciolini secretary to his austere Capuchin brother Antonio who in 1627 became Bishop of Sinigaglia. Stranded in this little port on the Adriatic coast, Bracciolini poured out his complaints in letters full of self-pity until he was finally allowed back to Rome. There he and Cortona planned the decoration of the great Barberini ceiling (Plate 13).2 In this room it is the Bees and the Laurel, the two emblems which had been relatively neglected by Sacchi, that are made the essential themes of the fresco. In the centre of the ceiling Divine Providence, the sovereign of the Present and the Future, of Time and tire Fates, obeyed by all the Virtues, commands Immortality to crown them with a halo of stars as they form an escutcheon borne aloft by Faith, Hope and
Charity. Above, Religion, with her keys, and Rome, holding the papal tiara, add their tribute to the reigning family. Four subsidiary themes break through the conventional bounds of the frame and allude in symbolical forms to the virtuous and efficient government of the Pope. These themes appear general enough—the fight against the Vices, the encouragement of learning, the provision of plenty—but interpreters, with or without the help of Bracciolini himself, were quick to give them more specific applications: Abundance stood for young Cardinal Antonio and behind him could be seen the granaries he built; Hercules sighting the Vices was a particular (though hardly very pertinent) reference to Taddeo’s administration of Rome. And so through all the allegories.
Pietro da Cortona’s ceiling opens a new chapter in Baroque decoration: the whole vast expanse is covered with one single fresco instead of being broken up into separate compartments; the painted ‘frame’ appears to be deliberately defied by a swirling crowd of figures, whose grandeur and richness of colour awe, almost crush, the visitor with the feeling of his insignificance; writhing masses of raw, red, tumbling giants
-- convey the impression of some tremendous conflict being waged only just above his
334-5). She refers to the interpretation of the iconography given by Rosichino in 1640 (who spoke of the mythological scenes in largely general terms), by Girolamo Teti in 1642 (who claimed that they alluded to specific events in the lives of the Barberini) and by other observers, at least one of whom thought that these scenes might represent the Four Ages. She also suggested that for many seventeenthcentury writers the interpretation of pictures was to some extent an end in itself. See also Vitzthum,
1961, pp. 427-33-

[Page 53]
head so that he too is inextricably involved in the Pope’s strenuous war against the forces of evil.
But the very idea of such a theme was also quite new in papal patronage of the seventeenth century. No artist had been given such complex instructions for at least fifty years, for the Borghese and the Ludovisi had been content to have represented far more general historical and mythological subjects. In fact the ceilings by Sacchi and
Pietro da Cortona both reflect the intensely literary interests of the new court which were comparable with those of the Renaissance humanists. But Pietro, in particular, was able to combine these interests with a sense of display such as had hitherto been achieved only in literature. The artistic synthesis that resulted was eagerly adopted by court painters for well over a century, for in his ceiling Pietro managed to incorporate an overall effect whose general meaning was startlingly clear with recondite allusions of great appeal to cultivated and sophisticated visitors. Moreover, the programme which he and Bracciolini devised carried princely flattery to a greater extreme than had yet been seen south of the Alps1; in this they were very likely encouraged by Cardinal
Francesco, who must certainly have seen and been impressed by the early stages of
Rubens’s allegorical cycle in honour of Marie de Medici and Henri IV in Paris. This novelty was recognised at the time. From Naples Domenichino (who in his youth had himself helped to decorate a cardinal’s gallery with themes suggesting the power of all-conquering love) wrote that, from what he had heard, the ceiling sounded more suitable for a secular prince than for a pope.2 Despite some modern apologists there will be few to quarrel with his interpretation.
While Pietro was at work on the ceiling of the family palace, Cardinal Francesco began to employ his leading pupil Giovan Francesco Romanelli on the many other obligations which he had undertaken.3 This artist, who retained the colour and mannerisms of his master without his fire or genius, was called upon whenever an altar or ceiling painting was required in one of the churches for which the Cardinal had assumed responsibility. He was also put in charge of the Barberini tapestry works. His painting became increasingly tired and flaccid rather than truly classic, and he never won many admirers other than the Pope and his nephew. But for that very reason he was utterly reliable, and was rewarded with pensions and honours. In 1638 he was made Principe of the Accademia di S. Luca ‘on the orders of Cardinal [Francesco] Barberini’ who entirely controlled that body and who had contributed large sums towards the complete rebuilding of its church by Pietro da Cortona. For a time, indeed, Romanelli’s ambitions soared so high that he aimed to supplant his master in the Pope’s service.

[Page 54]
vi -
The relations between temperament and aesthetic taste are complex and mysterious.
The learned Cardinal Francesco, correspondent and friend of half the scholars of Europe, chose as his favourite artists the richly coloured and extrovert Pietro da Cortona and his somewhat more restrained follower Romanelli. Andrea Sacchi, a reserved and melancholy figure, whose development is marked by an increasing reluctance even to try and compete with his revered Raphael, had to rely for support almost entirely on Francesco’s second brother, the impetuous Antonio. Antonio was the youngest of the Pope’s nephews, and to the horror of the elder members of the Conclave, was made Cardinal in 1627 when aged only 19. For such a status he seems to have had no qualifications whatsoever beyond greed and ambition.1 The former was to some extent appeased by the vast income he derived from his many official posts—though it is doubtful whether he ever achieved his aim of earning as much as Cardinals Borghese and Ludovisi; the latter was constantly thwarted by Francesco and the Pope himself, who sent him out of
Rome as often as possible.
Antonio was an elegant figure, fatter in the face than Francesco, with alert and gleaming eyes, a neatly trimmed moustache carefully turned up at the ends and thick wavy hair; clearly a dandy and a bon vivant.2 But he too shared the family enthusiasm for learning and art. His first real opportunity to assert himself in this field came in 1631 with the devolution of Urbino to the papacy. Ever since he had come to the throne
Urban VIII had been pressing hard his indubitable claims to the city which was due to be incorporated in the ecclesiastical states on the death of the aged duke Francesco
Maria della Rovere whose own heirless son had predeceased him. Urban persuaded the reluctant ruler to hand over all effective authority to a governor named from Rome, and when on 28 April 1631 the sad, lonely old man finally died, immediate steps were taken to gain possession of the State. Taddeo, who inherited the della Rovere title of
Prefect of Rome, galloped across the frontier. He was followed soon after by Antonio who became the first Legate.
Antonio clearly hoped to enrich his collection of pictures from the marvellous supply in Urbino as greatly as the Aldobrandini and Borghese had done in Ferrara a generation earlier. This was not to be. Urbino was certainly despoiled—but the bulk of the collection went elsewhere. The old duke had left his private possessions to his daughter Vittoria della Rovere, wife of the Grand Duke of Tuscany. As Antonio arrived in the empty palace which nearly two centuries earlier Federigo da Montefeltre had built and turned into a symbol of Renaissance culture, packing cases loaded with
Titians and Raphaels had already left for Florence.3 Little enough remained, but in the
Studiolo were still hanging on the walls those portraits of ancient and modern poets and philosophers which Justus of Ghent and Pedro Berruguete had painted for the original owner. They were at once removed and sent to Rome. There the Pope issued a special

[Page 55]
decree to justify Cardinal Antonio’s action and hand over the pictures to him and his heirs in perpetuity.1
Cardinal Antonio’s most important contribution to artistic patronage was his regular support for Andrea Sacchi, without which, claimed Passeri, ‘he would have lived like a beggar’.2 Antonio played a part in obtaining for the artist the commissions in the Capuchin church and above all the family palace, and thereafter he was the only one of the Barberini to give him consistent employment. Such steadfast patronage at this stage meant taking an artistic stand which had not hitherto proved necessary, for it was not until the early ’thirties that the divergencies between Pietro da Cortona and
Sacchi, both brought up in the Titianesque tradition, became strikingly apparent. But from now on, both in theoretical debates and in his works themselves, Sacchi showed that he disapproved of Pietro’s exuberance and complexity. He more and more praised the merits of simplicity and looked to Raphael as his special inspirer. Cardinal Antonio, who gave him a monthly salary and enrolled him into his official retinue some time before 1637, must have been well aware of and have approved this attitude. Sacelli was also an excessively slow worker, and a large proportion of his regular output was painted for this one highly placed patron—mainly canvases for churches, notably the Lateran
Baptistery, of which the modelli would be kept by the Cardinal in his private collection.
He accompanied Antonio on his travels outside Rome and acted as general artistic adviser to him in the decoration of the palace for which Antonio assumed responsibility and in which he lived. When in 1639 the Cardinal organised a great reception in the
Gesù to celebrate the centenary of the approval given to the Jesuit statutes, Sacchi designed the temporary decoration of the church and had it hung with tapestries. He also recorded the event in a special picture.
Indeed, the most surprising of Cardinal Antonio’s commissions to Sacchi were those on which he employed him, together with a genre-painter, to record various scenes from contemporary Roman life in which he or his family was involved.3 The most significant of these was the great ‘mediaeval joust’ which Cardinal Antonio organised in the Piazza Navona in 1634/ This had originally been planned as an entertainment for a Polish prince who was due to visit Rome, but when the visit was cancelled, the
Cardinal determined to carry on ‘as he desired to see revived among the young men of
Rome their ancient taste for chivalry, which, owing to the state of the times, was ignored rather than wholly lost’. The Bentivoglio were in charge of the arrangements, and though spectacles of this kind were not rare in Baroque Rome there is a certain irony in the contemplation of this clerical society listening to grandiose challenges that
‘Secrecy in love is a superstitious fallacy that assumes either little merit in the lady or lack of spirit in the knight’. None the less this elaborate pastiche of feudal practices met

[Page 56]
with delighted approval and Andrea Sacchi painted the culminating moment in the
Piazza Navona as well as drawing the illustrations for a book by Cardinal Bentivoglio which described the occasion.
Antonio’s joust forms part of a whole series of moves by the Barberini to emphasise the chivalrous past of Rome and, by implication, to associate within it the history of their own family. The elaborate and by now wholly artificial ceremonial with which
Don Taddeo was made Prefect of Rome—a scene which Agostino Tassi was required to paint1—provides a further instance of the same attitude, as does his marriage into the most venerable of Roman families and assumption of feudal rights over Palestrina and elsewhere. At the same time as their lavish consumption of wealth was effectively ruining the oldest families the Barberini were desperately trying to revive the ancient forms for their own benefit.
Meanwhile the palace was being filled with works of art and treasures of all kinds.
In 1642 a lavishly illustrated folio volume was published with an ample, though somewhat generalised, account of its contents.2 Breathlessly the writer described the rooms filled with paintings by Raphael and Correggio, Titian and Perugino, the Cavaliere d’Arpino, Guido Reni, Lanfranco, Guercino, Pietro da Cortona, Sacchi, Camassei and others; the great allegorical ceilings; the vast collections of antiques; and above all the splendid library which was the special concern of Cardinal Francesco with its Greek and
Roman manuscripts, its store of learning accumulated from all over the world, its books of poetry and theology, law and history, music, architecture, astrology and botany—a real Temple of the Muses to which the Cardinal would retire while the rest of the palace resounded with courtiers and foreign delegates.
But the most immediately striking feature of the Barberini palace was the theatre.
Operatic performances were given for the first time in February 1632, though it was probably not until a few years later that they were transferred from a large room in the palace to a theatre specially built by Pietro da Cortona which was capable of seating an audience of 3ooo.3 Jean-Jacques Bouchard, the French ’libertin’, was there for the first
The Barberini inventories have been published by Marilyn Aronberg Lavili.
An inventory of 1631 was published in part by Orbaan, 1920, pp. 495-513, and ofthe many travellers’ accounts the fullest is that by Nicodemus Tessin the Younger and must date from 1687-8—Stockholm,
Kungliga Biblioteket, Handskriftsand S.41. I am most grateful to Miss Jennifer Montagu for pointing this out to me and showing me a photocopy. See also Cantalamessa, 1894, pp. 79-101. As from 193 5 large numbers of Barberini pictures have been sold either privately or, anonymously, in sale catalogues such as Preziosa Raccolta di Quadri...già appartenuti ad illustri famiglie patrizie—Galleria l’Antonina, Roma,
16-23 January 1935. I wish to thank Professor Waterhouse for pointing this out to me and for lending me his copy of the catalogue.

[Page 9]
Guido Abbatini: Frontispiece of Aedes Barberinae with view of family palace

[Page ii]
a. Pietro da Cortona: Rape of the Sabines
b. Pietro da Cortona: Rape of Helen

[Page li]
a. Gio. Maria Bottalla: Meeting of Esau and Jacob
b. Pietro Testa: Joseph sold by his brothers

[Page 12]
modsiW
eniviD
ihccaS
:

[Page 57]
performance, and he gives a vivid description of the room hung with red, blue and yellow satin, the two young Barberini Cardinals affably greeting their guests and begging them to squeeze closer together to allow more space, the prelates shouting with admiration at the beauty of the pages and castrati who were given the women’s roles... . J
The opera itself was S. Alessio, the story of a rich young man who wished to escape from the world. He disguised himself as a monk in his own palace and had to endure the torment of watching his wife and parents mourning over his supposed death. When the strain became too great and he was on the verge of revealing himself God showed him mercy by summoning him to the next world. The libretto of this curious, but affecting, story was written by Giulio Rospigliosi, the most attractive of the poets and art lovers who swarmed round the court of Urban VIII. Like most of the circle he was a Tuscan and his first literary work consisted of a commentary on the eulogistic L’elettione di
Urbano VlII by his fellow Pistoian Francesco Bracciolini. This was published in 1628 when he was 28? Naturally enough it won him the favour of the Barberini and thereafter his career was made. He accompanied Cardinal Francesco, whose literary and artistic interests he shared, to Spain. Back in Rome he became the discerning patron of a number of painters, and, in particular, he was able to find a congenial interpreter of his
‘morality poems’ in Nicolas Poussin. The artist painted three of these, though it is not absolutely certain that they were all for Rospigliosi himself—The Dance of Human Life,
Truth uncovered by Time and Happiness subject to Death (or The Arcadian Shepherds).3
All these themes, translated by Poussin into works of poignant beauty, reveal a grave, melancholy, yet ultimately hopeful view of man’s destiny. But Rospigliosi was almost alone among Roman patrons in showing as great an appreciation for the wistful poetry of Claude as for the grander austerities of Poussin. He owned three landscapes by him and evidently became his close friend, for in his will the artist left Rospigliosi two drawings ‘because I have always received good advice from him’.4 Many other artists received patronage if not always advice at different stages in his life—Camassei and
Lodovico Gimignani, Giovanni Francesco Grimaldi and Mattia Preti; Carlo Maratta
In the Nota dei Musei Bellori mentions that Rospigliosi also owned a Rest on the Flight into Egypt by Poussin. See also Richard, VI, pp. 57-62.

[Page 58]
and Bernini. And when in 1667 Rospigliosi became Pope Clement IX, he managed to give striking proof of his love of art though he only survived for two years.1
Under Urban VIII, Rospigliosi, who was given a number of important posts in the administration, was chiefly known for his poems and the verse dramas he wrote for the palace theatre—at first only religious and then, beginning in 1639 with Chi soffre, speri which was seen by Milton, also profane. In fact, however, it was neither the librettos
. nor the rather indifferent music of Stefano Landi and others which really excited the public, but the singers and, above all the spectacle.2
Bernini was of course in charge of the frequent changes of decor for S. Alessio, and though his surviving plans appear to us to be remarkably conservative and unadventurous, Roman spectators, who lacked much theatrical experience, were deeply impressed. All of them wrote with enthusiasm of the vividness of the scenes in Hell, the woody landscapes, the palace, the angels flying through the clouds, the final triumphant appearance of Religion. The performance stimulated a passion for sensational effects which were much more vividly produced in the provisional theatre which
Bernini erected outside his own house. Here he directed plays written (and often acted) by himself, the most famous of which was L'Inondazione del Tevere given during the carnival of 1638 and inspired by a flood of the year before. As no drawings for it have survived, we have to rely entirely on the evidence of contemporary spectators. ‘When the curtain rose,’ wrote one of them,3 ‘a marvellous scene appeared showing the most distant buildings in perspective, above all St Peter’s, the Castel S. Angelo and many others well known to those who live in Rome. Nearer, you saw the Tiber, which through hidden devices of the most ingenious kind, was shown to be rising.... Nearer that part of the stage where the acting took place was real water held back by dykes which had been specially placed all round the scene. And you saw real men rowing people from one side to the other, as if the river had submerged the lower part of the city and stopped traffic as it did last year. While everyone was stunned by the spectacle, various officials went to inspect the banks and repair the blocks and dykes so that the river should not flood the city. But suddenly the banks collapsed and the water, rising above the stage, began to pour down towards the auditorium. Those who were nearest thought that there was real danger and got up so as to run away. But just as the water was about to fall on them, a large dyke suddenly emerged at the edge of the stage and the water was diverted without harming anyone.... . It was only after this and similar
- - accounts that the guests referred to the great satirical licence that was allowed to
Bernini.

**Footnotes:**
1 Pastor, XIII, pp. 274 IF.
2 Miintz et Molinier, 1885.
3 U. Barberini, 1950.
4 The picture which was later given away by Cardinal Barberini (perhaps to Richelieu) is now lostsee Exposition Poussin, p. 216.
1 See the many letters from artists and reports of meetings in Pollak, 1931, II.
2 ibid., pp. 230-1 and p. 294; Bellori, 1942, p. 47.
3 Pollak, 1931, II, p. 566.
4 ibid., 1931, II, pp. 79 ff.
6 Malvasia, II, p. 27, and Bottari, I, p. 296.
8 Pollak, 1931, II, p. 87.
1 Exposition Poussin, pp. 74, 216 and 219. The first Capture of Jerusalem and the Samson have disappeared. The Death of Germanicus is now in the Minneapolis Institute of Arts and the second Capture of Jerusalem is in the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna.
2 This picture, now in the Finnish Institute in Rome, was first recorded in the Barberini inventory of 1631—Orbaan, 1920, p. 506. It was published by J. Thuillier in 1958 and exhibited in Les Français à Rome (No. 250), held at the Archives Nationales in Paris, 1961.
3 Vouet’s pictures for Roman patrons are discussed by Louis Demonts. In 1624 he was elected Principe of the Accademia di S. Luca, the first foreigner to hold the post.
4 Pollak, 1931, II, pp. 230-4 and 540-1.
1 Barozzi e Berchet, I, p. 153: Renier Zeno, 1621-3.
2 The documents published by Pecchiai (1959, pp. 161 ff.) effectively dispose of Pastor’s claim (XIII, p. 263) that Taddeo ‘brillava per la purezza di costumi . . .'.
3 See constant reports over the years from the Venetian ambassadors—and this despite the fact that they were the ones most frequently embroiled with Taddeo.
4 Giuho Pisano. 1011.
6 Blunt’s article in the Journal os the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, 1958, needs to be supplemented by Hibbard’s monograph on Carlo Maderno.
1 Litta. The family originated in Bologna, but an important branch had long been settled in Ferrara.
2 Bentivoglio, 1807, pp. 14 ff.
3 The portrait is now in the Pitti. It was painted early in 1623—Bellori, p. 255, and Vaes, 1924, p. 211.
4 Jan Niceo Eritreo, II, pp. 34-7.
1 The palace was bought by Bentivoglio from the Altemps family in 1619—see Callari, p. 298.
2 Bellori, p. 255.
3 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 3 54.
4 The pictures are now distributed as follows: Landscape with Rural Dance (Lord Yarborough Collection); Seaport (two versions—Duke of Northumberland Collection and Louvre); Santa Marinella (Petit Palais, Paris); Castel Gandolfo (Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge)—see Rothlisberger, 1961, p. 121.
6 Campori, 1866, p. 103. The frescoes are described and reproduced by O. H. Giglioli, 1949, who also publishes two other ceiling frescoes in the same palace of the Death of Cleopatra and the Flight of Aeneas from Troy which he attributes to the same artist and dates 1624. Baldinucci (VI, 1728, pp. 25-7) has a long story of Giovanni da San Giovanni working on a Carro della Notte to rival Guido Reni’s
1 Aurora in the palace and fighting with two Frenchmen who tried to wreck it. He says that Bentivoglio’s patronage was responsible for the artist’s success in Rome—i.e. before his frescoes for Cardinal Mellino in SS. Quattro Coronati which were painted in 1624.
8 Paola della Pergola, I, p. 152, with documents.
7 Passeri, p. 350.
1 Besides contemporary sources and Bellori, 1672, p. 360, see Presenzini. Cigoli had already painted scenes from this story in the palace when it belonged to Scipione Borghese.
2 Girolamo Teti
3 Incisa della Rocchetta, 1924, p. 64.
1 Guy de Tervarant, column 356.
2 For the most recent discussion of the fresco see Briganti, 1962.
1 Barbi.
2 Much light has been thrown on the Barberini ceiling and the varying meanings that it may have had for Pietro da Cortona’s contemporaries by a stimulating article by Jennifer Montagu (1968, pp.
1 I cannot accept Pastor’s view (XIII, p. 968) that ‘la personalità di Urbano Vili passa in seconda linea di fronte all’esaltazione del papa istituito da Dio’. In part this depends on an obvious misinterpretation of the iconography, for it makes nonsense of the theme to suggest that Immortality is crowning Divine Providence rather than the Barberini emblems.
2 See his letter of 1 September 1640 to Francesco Angeloni published by Bellori, p. 358.
3 For the relations between Romanelli and the Barberini see Passeri, pp. 305-14, and Pollak, 1913 and 1931, pp. 219-222, 548-9, 560-2, 580-1.
1 Apart from Pastor and Pecchiai, 1959, see the report of the Venetian ambassador Angelo Contarini, 1627-9, published by Barozzi e Berchet, I, p. 257.
2 See the portrait on p. 73 ofTeti. 3 [Gotti, A.]: pp. 102 ff.
1 Pollak, 1927, I, p. 336. These pictures are at present divided between the Louvre and the Palazzo Ducale in Urbino. Other pictures which were taken from Urbino at this time include the so-called Tavole Barberini attributed by Federico Zeri to Giovanni Angelo da Camerino—see Due dipinti, la filologia e un nome, 1961. 2 Incisa della Rocchetta, 1924, p. 63, and Posse, 1925.
3 Incisa della Rocchetta, 1959, pp. 20 fF.
4 Bentivoglio, 1882. For earlier examples of such festivals see F. Clementi.
1 Incisa della Rocchetta, 1959, pp. 20 ss.
2 Teri.
3 There is great confusion about this date. Pastor (XIII, p. 972) and Ademollo (1888, p. 10) both say 1634; Blunt (Journal of Warburg Institute, 1958, p. 282) implies 1633; Prunières (1913, p. 8) 1632. This latter date, confirmed by Bouchard’s evidence and an avviso published by Clementi, I, p. 444, is the correct one and the muddle has been caused by the repeat performances given in later years.
1 Prunires, 1913, p. 9.
2 Beani and Canevazzi.
8 The Dance of Human Life is in the Wallace Collection; The Arcadian Shepherds in the Louvre and Truth and Time has disappeared. The first and last of these were engraved by Jean Dughet and dedicated to Rospigliosi, which seems to confirm the somewhat confused account by Bellori (p. 448) that the subjects Were chosen by him. See also Panofsky (1957, p. 305) who is, however, mistaken when he writes that Rospigliosi may have been in contact with Guercino in 1621-3 through the artist’s visits to Guido Reni’s Aurora in the family palace, for at that time the Casino Rospigliosi belonged to Cardinal Bentivoglia—in this connection see letters from Denis Mahon to The Listener, 24 August and 14 September 1961. Mahon also suggests (i960, p. 3 04, and 1962, p. in) that on stylistic grounds The Arcadian Shepherds may be dated 1640 instead of 1650-5, to which period it is usually given. This would also fit in far better with Bellori’s account as Rospigliosi was in Madrid from 1644 to 1653 and The Dance of Human Life certainly dates from c. 1637.
4 For Claude’s will see Rothlisberger, 1961, p. 67. Two of the pictures are still in the RospigliosiPallavicini collection in Rome—ibid., p. 127.
1 For Rospigliosi and artists see also Bellon, 1942, pp. 87-8; Pascoli, I, pp. 41, 47,138, and II, pp. 128, 155, 302, 482; De Dominici, IV, p. 13, and Pastor, XIV, pp. 553 ff. 2 Prunieres, 1913, chapter I.
8 Fraschetti, p. 264. Another account of the same occasion was written many years later by the artist’s son Domenico (p. 55).