# 02 CHP-2 sec ii

That moment came in 1623. On 6 August, after a stormy conclave, Maffeo Barberini achieved his ambition and was elected Pope, as Urban VIII. He was only 55 and in the best of health. From the first he made it clear that his was going to be the supreme power in the state—‘the only use of Cardinals these days’, wrote the Venetian ambassador,1 ‘is to act as a grandiose crown for the Pope’. At once he began to surround himself with his relations and friends. Six weeks after his election he made his 26-yearold nephew Francesco a Cardinal; a year later his brother Antonio, a Capuchin monk, received the same dignity, as did his other brother’s brother-in-law Lorenzo Magalotti.
Four years later followed the Pope’s younger nephew, Antonio, aged only 19. Antonio’s brother Taddeo was given important political posts, great wealth and the prospect of a rich and aristocratic wife. Most of these men were fond of the arts, and to their patronage
Rome owes some of its greatest achievements.
Nepotism was a recognised feature of the papal system—so much so that the ambitious nephew of onepapabile cardinal was in 1635 to use witchcraft in an attempt to do away with Urban VIII and thus ensure his own fortune.2 With jealousies so strong there was much to be said for the Pope employing a close relation as his most intimate adviser. Moreover, wealth and status went hand-in-hand, and the enrichment of the papal family was therefore looked upon as inevitable, if not actually desirable. Indeed status itself was so precarious in view of frequent shifts of power that extreme wealth provided the only ultimate security for those prepared to take office.3 Nor was much distinction made between the papal treasury and any pope’s personal income. Yet despite all this. Urban VIII was universally held by his contemporaries and by his successors to have exceeded all reasonable limits.4 The consequences were many, and only a few can be referred to here. The still existing, though already shadowy, selfgovernment of the city of Rome virtually came to an end, and the Senate did little more than propose the erection of monuments dedicated to various members of the
Barberini family. And the great feudal clans which had once tyrannised the city suffered irreparable damage. Living on the fixed incomes of their landed estates and participating in. the great European wars, they were quite unable to compete with the wealth that poured into the papal court from all over the world and was then consumed in spectacular monuments or great ceremonial occasions. Their disintegration had been going on fonadong time: now it reached its climax. In 1624, for instance, the Orsini sold their estates at Monte Rotondo to Carlo Barberini; a year later the Colonna sold their
Castle of Roviano to the same buyer. Finally, in 1629, another branch of the family was compelled to sell the principality of Palestrina to the Barberini for 175,000 scudi.5

[Page 32]
Their only purpose, henceforth, was to provide suitably aristocratic wives for the upstarts who had taken their place in the government of Rome. After some hesitation, in view of the family’s Spanish affiliations, Anna Colonna, daughter of the Contestabile, was chosen as bride for Don Taddeo, the Pope’s nephew.1
When Urban VIII came to the throne the papal states were rich enough. The
Venetian ambassadors estimated their income to be two million scudi a year, and pointed out that, despite the absence of trade, the city was almost self-supporting, ‘being extremely fertile in wheat, wine, oil and all those things which make nations prosperous and esteemed’.2 Moreover the pope’s financial patronage extended all over Italy, and important posts could be—and were—sold to the highest bidder at large profits.
The new Pope professed himself determined to maintain this wealth. ‘He blames those of his predecessors who have consumed the inheritance of the Church in buildings and other things of the kind.’3 It was not long before he followed their example on a vast scale. The aggrandisement and beautifying of Rome had acquired an impetus of its own. To refrain from continuing needed far greater will power than Urban VIII possessed. Nor, despite his protestations to the commercially minded Venetian ambassador, can he ever have seriously thought such a move desirable. As the nation states of
Europe increased their power, the prestige of Rome came to depend more and more on the grandeur of her impact. The ambassadors themselves recognised this: ‘In Italy,’ wrote Pietro Contarini in 1623,4 ‘the Pope owns a superb state with several cities well worthy of it; and Rome especially, where the Popes usually live in recognition of her having formerly been mistress of the world, both for the ancient survivals of her past greatness and for the modern features which can be seen and which are cared for with perhaps equal attention, is a sort of emporium of the Universe. To Rome people come from every country as they have done at all times to see her splendours; and it would scarcely be an exaggeration to say that they come to pay her tribute, as she is as much the motherland of foreigners, as of her own citizens.’ Even had the economic situation been infinitely graver, was it not a duty to continue this policy of beautifying the city?
Besides, there were other arguments in its favour. One Pope, we are told,5 ‘used to say that it was public charity to build, and all princes should do so: because it brought assistance to the public and to private citizens, and employment on buildings greatly helped the people’. And so Urban VIII could envisage personal satisfaction and general benefit in the great works he planned.
As Pope, Urban VIII combined three important functions. He was the spiritual director of the Catholic world whose centre was Rome; he was the absolute monarch of one of the richest states in Italy; and he was the proud head of an ambitious family.
The nature and scope of his patronage was deeply affected by all three considerations,

[Page 33]
which at times set up insoluble tensions. Yet greatly as they overlapped or conflicted, his patronage can perhaps best be appreciated by looking at them separately.
As a temporal and spiritual leader Urban VIII was faced with a situation whose all too obvious dangers were only surpassed by those more subtle threats which were eventually to undermine the whole status of the papacy. The immediate problem was no longer the Protestant advance which had caused so much trouble to his predecessors:
the reconciliation of Henri IV in 1593 and the Battle of the White Hill in 1621 had proved effective barriers—indeed the sense of triumph which so many observers have noted in the style of the mature Baroque, contemporary with Urban VIII, no doubt reflected the impact of these overwhelming victories. The problem lay rather in the traditional enmity between the two great Catholic powers, France and the Hapsburg
Empire, whose jockeyings for position and searches for allies frequently threatened the peace of Italy and the security of the papal states. And so tire attention paid by Urban
VIII to fortifications both in and out of Rome had a far greater effect on his contemporaries than is usually recognised, and was recorded in many works of art.1 Though he tried to remain neutral, Urban was in fact compelled to lean much too heavily on his alliance with France—a situation that was eagerly turned to advantage by the unscrupulous Richelieu and that helped to reinforce the already strong French aspects of his culture.
But within Rome the situation was more complex and much harder to deal with.
The severity of the Counter Reformation had uprooted the gravest evils of the city, but when it was relaxed a much more dangerous spiritual crisis was revealed. The old explanations no longer satisfied: instead, serious scientific experiments as conducted by the Accademia dei Lincei and Galileo, abstruse metaphysical speculations derived from certain materialist strands of Renaissance thought, the astrological theories of deliberate charlatans and a cynical or-frivolous disbelief, all emerged from the stifling silence and penetrated to the very core of Roman society, affecting the papacy itself.2 In the words of one well-informed but somewhat optimistic French disbeliever, ‘on pardonne à
Rome aux Athées, aux Sodomites, aux libertins et à plusieurs autres fripons; mais on ne pardonne jamais à ceux qui mesdisent du Pape ou de la Cour Romaine... . . L’Italie est pleine de libertins et d’Athées, et gens qui ne croyent rien.’3 The reaction was, in fact, a rather spasmodic persecution combined with an often secret indulgence. Above all there was the firmly held belief that by emphasising all the outward forms of orthodox religion it would be possible to win men back to the old ways. The immense stimulus to ecclesiastical architecture and decoration given by Urban VIII was at least partly aimed at stifling doubts within Italy itself—hence the emphasis on ‘persuasion’ which is the other feature of the Baroque that every observer has noted.

[Page 34]
The achievement of grandeur, triumph and persuasion so characteristic of the
Barberini style was largely due to one man. ‘As Urban VIII was a Florentine, the radiance of the Bolognese came to an end.’ Thus Passeri many years later.1 Gian Lorenzo
Bernini (we hear from the same, hostile, source), though born in Naples of a Neapolitan mother, was most anxious to stress the fact that his father was a Florentine.2 Part of the immense appeal he had for Urban VIII must certainly be attributed to this. During the early years of lais pontificate especially Urban again and again showed his determination to give the best jobs to Tuscan artists. Yet he had had plenty of opportunity to see that the quality of Bernini’s work was at least as good a recommendation as the circumstances of his birth. ‘It is your great good luck, Cavalière,’ he is reported to have said soon after his accession, ‘to see Maffeo Barberini Pope; but we are even luckier in that the Cavalière Bernini lives at the time of Our Pontificate.’3 Action was soon to prove how genuine was the sentiment even if the words themselves are apocryphal.
Within a few months Bernini, who throughout the previous reign had been working on decorative sculpture and small-scale busts, was given his first official post and began his first monumental works.
The new Pope’s main attention was centred on St Peter’s, which he was able to consecrate in 1626. The exterior was now complete. The façade had been erected by
Carlo Maderno by 1612, and malicious observers were quick to point out that far more prominence had been given to inscribing on it the name of Paul V than that of St
Peter: ‘It is not for the Prince of the Apostles that the Church has been built, but for his
Vicar, Paul.’4 Urban’s plans for the interior were fully as grandiose, and even more ambitious. He chose for his special patronage the central area under Michelangelo’s dome and by the end of his reign he and Bernini had dramatically established the main decoration of this, the most important part of the church. Yet though the rhythm of work was intense it is unlikely that Urban had started with an overall plan for the whole area. Only after the first great step had been undertaken did the nature of lais ideas become fully apparent.
In July 1624, less than a year after Urban’s assumption of power, Bernini began work on a gigantic baldacchino to replace the one that had been temporarily set above the supposed tomb of St Peter. There were a number of obstacles to overcome, and two in particular caused some trouble: the danger that early Christian tombs would be irrevocably disturbed by the foundations of the new structure and the shortage of bronze for columns that were to rise as high as the Palazzo Farnese, the greatest palace in Rome. The first problem'was solved by careful archaeological investigation and the use of artists to record all discoveries; the second by the despoiling of the Pantheon.
After nine years the whole project was eventually completed.5

[Page 35]
Artistically Bernini’s highly imaginative baldacchino was an immediate success, and contemporaries were all struck by the marvellous way in which it drew attention to itself without impeding the general view of the church. Iconographically it was relatively simple, as was most of the religious art of the period, but a change in conception when work had already been begun shows that the original intention had been somewhat different. It had been planned to crown the edifice with a huge statue of the
Risen Christ. At a later stage this was changed to a Cross, and the effect was to dedicate the monument to Christ’s passion rather than His triumph. References toSt Peter himself and the establishment of the papacy were confined to relatively small angels above the cornice carrying his tiara and keys. But the most immediately striking feature of the baldacchino is the use of giant twisted columns, a form much admired by Raphael.
The overwhelming religious precedents for these made them ideally suitable as the climax of the greatest Christian church: for the twisted column was supposed to derive from Solomon’s Temple in Jerusalem, and against one of them, preserved in St Peter’s itself, Christ was supposed to have leant. Moreover, the twisted column, intertwined with vine leaves, formed an essential feature of the screen of many ancient basilicas including that of St Peter’s.
Urban VIII probably played a direct part in outlining the iconographical scheme:
certainly he made sure that he should be closely identified with it. The Barberini bees crawl up the columns and hang down on bronze tassels from the cornice; the Barberini sun blazes above the rich capitals; an elementary knowledge of botany makes it clear that the leaves on the columns are those of the laurel—another Barberini emblem— and not the traditional vine. From now on their family history was to be indelibly linked with that of the great church. The cost had been enormous—200,000 soldi or a tenth of the annual income of the papal states; and the removal, at Bernini’s suggestion, of bronze from the Pantheon, a step which led to a bitter little epigram from the Pope’s own doctor and the first of the grumblings that were to accompany many of his enterprises.1
The influence of the Pope in the decorating of St Peter’s was obviously decisive, but alterations were nominally controlled by a permanent committee which, when
Urban came to the throne, was under the chairmanship of Cardinal Ginnasi. He was by now a very old man, of few gifts, one of the chief partisans in Rome of the Spanish cause, who had himself hoped to be elected Pope during the recent conclave.2 In June
1627, a few days before Bernini’s columns were unveiled, the committee decided to build spécial altars in the niches of tire pillars supporting the dome? Various proposals were made and the Pope, who saw them all, was careful to point out that the committee should choose which one it found most suitable. In fact, as was inevitable, Bernini’s

[Page 36]
scheme was accepted and the plan was changed. The altars were to be placed in the crypt and the niches reserved for statues of the four saints whose relics were most venerated in the church.1 Four leading sculptors were chosen by Bernini for this commission2— and he himself produced one of the figures, St Longinus. A Flemish sculptor François
Duquesnoy, who had worked under him on the baldacchino, carved a St Andrew which aroused much controversy and was used as a touchstone by all those who were most hostile to Bernini’s more decidedly Baroque tendencies. And at the same time as these plans were being put into effect, balconies were built above the niches so that the relics associated with the saints concerned could be displayed on certain feast days and recalled to the faithful by stone reproductions carried by angels.
Only two further direct commissions by Urban VIII for St Peter’s need be considered here. At the end of 1633 Bernini with a number of assistants began work on a marble relief, which was intended to beplaced inside the church butis now in the portico, representing Christ entrusting his flock to St Peter—the foundation stone, as it were, of papal claims; and at the same time he designed a tomb in the right aisle for the Countess
Matilda whose body the Pope had specially transferred from the province of Mantua— that Countess, whose bequest at the end of the eleventh century of all her property to the Holy See had first established the territorial government of the church on a firm basis. To make sure that the implications of this should be fully realised, the principal relief on the tomb showed the Emperor Henry IV kneeling before Pope Gregory VII at Canossa.
When the scheme was eventually complete it was apparent that the Pope and
Bernini had given new meaning to the whole church. As Urban in the last years of his life entered through the west door he must, like pilgrims to this day, have been drawn forward irresistibly to the dominating baldacchino. Standing there he could see the results of his patronage. All the elements echoed each other in style and theme: a great hymn of praise to the martyrdomofChrist, His Saints and His Apostles unequalled in emotional force anywhere in the world; but also, so fused as to be an essential part of the whole structure, a passionate reminder of the overwhelming glories of the papacy and of his own house.
The work took a large number of years and continued almost until the end of his pontificate, but long before that it had ensured Bernini’s prestige in Rome and throughout Europe. Most important of all his authority with the Pope was now absolute. He
"'was given 10,000 scudi for his building of the baldacchino, honours were showered on himself and on his family and he was made virtually artistic dictator of Rome. It became a standing complaint that to work for the Barberini without his patronage was impossible. ‘That dragon who ceaselessly guarded the Orchards of the Hesperides’, wrote Passeri3, parodying a poem written in praise of Bernini, ‘made sure that no one else should snatch the golden apples of Papal favour. He spat poison everywhere, and

[Page 37]
was always planting ferocious spikes along the path that led to rich rewards.’ Naturally enough his domineering attitude earned him many enemies, but as long as Urban VIII lived his position was impregnable. Indeed the Pope was as keen that Bernini should work exclusively for him as the artist was that no one else should usurp his place.
Between 1623 and 1644 Bernini undertook almost no work of any importance other than that commissioned by the Barberini. Unquestionably this was largely because of the pressure of time and the gigantic nature of the papal commissions. But there was another reason. The Pope was not anxious that the great artist he had at his disposal should immortalise anyone other than himself—no doubt he was well aware of the opportunities that had been missed by successive patrons of Michelangelo (whose memory haunted both Urban and Bernini), and realised fully how much glory a commission to Bernini could confer on the patron as well as on the artist. Only very few cardinals or princes could obtain works from him. Just before dying Scipione
Borghese, the sculptor’s first important patron, had his jovial, acute features recorded in two splendid busts (Plate 5)—but only with special authorisation from the Pope.1 In other cases the execution at least was often left to assistants. Foreign rulers—Charles I of England and Cardinal Richelieu of France—had to implore the Barberini to allow
Bernini to make portraits of them, and permission was only granted as an exceptional favour in return for useful privileges.2 Indeed, to stress the diplomatic importance of these occasions the Pope took special steps to stop Bernini working for anyone without his ruling. We hear from the English sculptor Nicholas Stone that when the artist was carving the bust of Thomas Baker (the man entrusted with conveying to Bernini
Van Dyck’s triple portrait of Charles I) ‘. . . it fell out that his patrone the Pope came to here of itt who sent Cardinal Barberine to forbid him . . . for the Pope would have no other picture sent into England from this hand but his Maity’.3
At much the same time as Urban VIII had commissioned the baldacchino for St
Peter’s he had also entrusted Bernini with his first purely arcliitectural work—the reconstruction and decoration of the little church of S. Bibiana. That this unimportant and out-of-the-way church should hold such a vital place in the history of the Baroque is largely due to an accident. During some routine restoration the body of the Saint was discovered, and the Pope took the opportunity of having the church completely rebuilt.4 Within a couple of years Bernini had finished the task and also made a statue of the Saint to be placed behind the High Altar—a restrained yet emotional work in which Tor the first time the combination of sensuality and mysticism which had appeared in so many Counter Reformation paintings was translated into sculpture.5

[Page 38]
On the same day that Bernini was given his first payment in connection with this statue, another Florentine artist, Agostino Ciampelli, was commissioned to paint on the walls a series of frescoes illustrating the life of the Saint. He was one of the group of
‘reformed Mannerists’ who had had considerable success in Rome especially in the prosperous Tuscan community, and the commission was therefore a natural recognition of his talents and nationality. He had scarcely been at work three months when a new painter was introduced and much to Ciampelli’s disgust given the left-hand wall on which to paint three scenes from the life and martyrdom of St Bibiana.
This new painter, Pietro Berrettini from Cortona, was also a Tuscan and he was brought to the attention of Urban VIII by one of the Pope’s closest friends, Marcello
Sacchetti (Plate 4b).1 The two brothers Marcello and Giulio, who came to play crucial roles in the political and artistic world of Urban VIII, were the sons of an extremely rich Florentine businessman who had moved to Rome towards the end of the sixteenth century and had soon become one of the leaders of the Tuscan community there. Their palace was situated near the Tiber in the parish of S. Giovanni dei Fiorentini, in which church they founded a grandiose family chapel, and within a few years of their arrival they had begun building a villa near Ostia whose finely decorated gallery was considered one of the most beautiful in Europe. Both Giulio and Marcello were devoted to learning and poetry, and it was this which sealed their friendship with Maffeo Barberini.
Marcello, who himself wrote Tuscan odes, had travelled throughout Europe and made contacts with scholars in many countries. Among his close friends was the most famous poet of the age, the Neapolitan Giambattista Marino, who returned to Italy from an eight-year visit to Paris in 1623.2 Marino spent only a year in Rome before going to
Naples where he died soon afterwards, disappointed in his hopes of papal patronage— no doubt the sensuality of much of his verse offended Urban’s austerer taste. None the less he enjoyed a triumphant welcome in Rome, and he must have been particularly well received by Sacchetti, to whom he had dedicated a pretty song, for the two men shared a passion for painting. Marino had made a collection of his own and had persuaded the young Nicolas Poussin to follow him to Italy. Above all he had written a series of very popular poems on works by leading artists in which he specially singled out for praise their pagan qualities.3 Sacchetti himself painted landscapes for pleasure, and he was always searching for new talent. One day on a visit to the studios he had come across a copy of Raphael’s Galatea, and seeking out the artist had been overjoyed to find that he too came from Tuscany.4 Pietro da Cortona was at once brought within the Sacchetti orbit and met Marino soon afterwards. Significantly one of his first commissions was to copy one of the Titians—a Holy Family with St Catherine—which
For this whole section see Mostra di Pietro da Cortona, 1956, and Brigand, 1962.

[Page 39]
had been acquired by Cardinal Aldobrandini from Ferrara. Marcello had decided views on painting and his encouragement of Pietro to copy Raphael and Titian marks a focal point in the history of seventeenth-century art: that combination of Raphael’s freest, most imaginative design with Titian’s warmth of colour was the foundation stone on which Baroque painting was established. Thereafter every artist was required to undergo similar training. Pietro was a docile artist who even in his later days of great fame would always ask his patrons for subjects,1 and here too Marcello’s influence was vital. He was a learned man, steeped in classical culture, and a poet, a new type of patron to whom the eager young Pietro was especially welcome. For Pietro could give warm and vivid life to his dreams of the past, could re-create for him all the trappings of antiquity and yet avoid the coldness of a ‘classical’ artist such as Domenichino. Annibale Carracci had had the same gift, but not since his death had a painter been as fresh, and yet as grand and as serious, in his evocation of the sables of ancient Rome and Greece as was
Pietro da Cortona at this stage of his life when he painted for Sacchetti large canvases of
The Sacrifice of Polyxena, The Triumph of Bacchus and shortly afterwards The Rape of the Sabines (Plate ioa). In these he moved from dark, and even crude, beginnings to a rich, warm, sun-soaked world of stately, processional figures which were soon adopted by other artists in the Sacchetti orbit (Plates rob, na, nb). Soon afterwards Marcello employed Pietro on a new and larger undertaking—the decoration of his country house at Castel Fusano near Ostia. Among the team of artists working under Pietro was another who was soon to achieve celebrity partly through the influence of the Sacchetti
—Andrea Sacchi.2 Once again Marcello chose the subjects—scenes from the Old and
New Testaments in the chapel, and tales from ancient Roman history on the walls and ceiling of the gallery. In his successful interpretation of these themes, and his ability 40 adapt them to a convincing decorative scheme, Pietro da Cortona showed that he had found his true road.
By this time Urban VIII had become Pope and the position of the Sacchetti changed dramatically. Giulio was made a Cardinal in 1626 and thereafter enjoyed a highly successful career in the Church; Marcello became papal treasurer and was given the monopoly of the alum mines at Tolfa which he at once had painted by Pietro.
Moreover, he became the Pope’s closest friend, the confidant of his most intimate secrets until ill-health compelled him to retire to Naples, where he died. The Sacchettis’ influence in matters of taste was decisive—their ‘shadow was enough to protect any artist’, wrote one chronicler3—and we hear that the brothers ‘took pleasure in the success of their favourite [Pietro da Cortona] and never grew tired of promoting his chances’.4
So it was that the young Pietro da Cortona joined Agostino Ciampelli in the church of
S. Bibiana. To his frescoes he brought the warmth and.breadth of his ‘grand manner’

[Page 40]
combined with the attention to classical detail which so delighted the connoisseurs.
Henceforward his success was assured and he joined Bernini as the Pope’s special artist.
A triumphant career lay ahead.
— iii —
Urban VIII was a handsome, cultivated and friendly man liable to fits of extremely bad temper. He retained throughout his life a deep love of poetry and the company of poets.
He himself wrote verses in Italian, Latin and even Greek, but he was especially keen to emphasise the religious content of his work and to encourage his friends to abandon the themes of pagan mythology. He devoted many poems to celebrating the beauties of nature and simple country life—in particular as it was lived in the villa he had built for himself at Castel Gandolfo, a stark and sober edifice added on to a mediaeval castle.1
On occasions he would tell foreign diplomats to talk business with his nephew so that he could confine his audiences to those literary discussions which were nearer his heart.2
In general, however, he was efficient, hard working and thoroughly well informed. He combined deep religious feeling with an element of crude superstition, and he dabbled extensively in astrology.3 But his leading characteristics were extreme vanity and overpowering ambition unaccompanied by any compensating strength of will. His rule is disfigured by acts of petty meanness4 and a complete failure to achieve that aggrandisement of the papacy which had been his original aim. The society in which he lived was one calculated to accentuate all his defects of character, yet to that society and to those defects we owe some of the most splendid monuments of his patronage. The art of flattery was an essential ingredient of the Baroque. Urban VIII gave it every opportunity for expression.
Within months of his accession the first fine editions of his poems began to pour from the presses of Rome, culminating in a splendid volume of 1631 produced by the
Jesuits and illustrated by Bernini. Bernini also made many busts in bronze and marble of the Pope throughout his.career.5 Nothing gives us a better impression of how Urban
VIII saw himself. There is none of the swagger and almost exaggerated elegance with which Bernini treated his royal patrons both at this period and in his later years. Such swashbuckling was quite unsuitable for the Vicar of Christ. After a few years of rule the Pope loses his early sparkle and is thereafter shown as grave, authoritarian and yet somewhat withdrawn from the world. These are images of hieratic dignity designed to
- portray a man who does not need to stress his right to be a ruler. And in all of them the
Pope is shown as exceedingly handsome and aristocratic, his long moustaches and beard

[Page 6]
Bernini; Cardinal Borghese

[Page 7]
Hunt of Diana
:
Domenichino
D

[Page 8]
Matteo Castelli : Family chapel in S. Andrea della Valle

[Page 41]
beautifully groomed, his firm flesh fitting closely over the bones, his clear eyes sad but alert. The busts convey little of the excitability and enthusiasms of which we know from other sources.
At the same time the Pope allowed, if he did not actually encourage, grander and more public monuments to be erected to himself. As early as 1627 Bernini was commissioned to make a bronze statue which was set up six years later in Velletri.1 And in
1635 the Roman Senate, by now a wholly anachronistic body, revoked a decree of 1590 by which statues of popes should not be erected on the Capitol during their lifetimes, and commissioned Bernini to make a large marble figure of Urban which was in the Palazzo dei Conservatori (Plate 2b). Meanwhile the Pope ordered Bernini to carve busts of the deceased members of his family—his father and mother and the uncle who had first encouraged his ambitions. When his brother Carlo died in 1630 the Pope commissioned a memorial plaque from Bernini and the Senate obsequiously followed suit by ordering the erection of a statue on the Capitol. An ancient torso of Julius
Caesar was refashioned by the Bolognese sculptor Alessandro Algardi and Bernini himself provided the head.2 Artistically the result is somewhat incongruous; psychologically much more so. Though commander-in-chief of the papal land and sea forces,
Carlo had scarcely been a Julius Caesar. A mild and yet efficient businessman, he had, on the accession of his younger brother, been suddenly overwhelmed with such overpowering honours and dignities that they had gone to his head and he had rather strangely tried to cope with the situation by making a Latin synopsis of Machiavelli’s
Prince.3 Even Bernini’s genius and an antique torso do not quite carry conviction and the monument is a memorial more to the aspirations of the Barberini than to their prowess.
Urban VIII’s greatest commission to record his own glory was that for his tomb which he ordered in 1627 after only three years on the throne.4 It was to be built in his own lifetime and prominently placed in St Peter’s. Not since Julius II had a pope taken such active steps to perpetuate himself in the greatest church in Christendom, though both Sixtus V and Paul V had had grandiose monuments built for themselves during their lifetimes. Bernini was, of course, entrusted with the work which was supervised by a protege of the Barberini, the humbly born and rather mean Angelo Giori, who had walked to Rome from Camerino where he worked as a schoolmaster when he heard of the possibilities of preferment.5 He was himself pn enthusiastic art lover, a keen admireCof Bernini and Sacchi, but above all the special patron of Claude, seven of whose pictures he owned.6 The work began quickly; a niche was built On the right of the apse and Guglielmo della Porta’s tomb of Paul III, who had summoned the Council

[Page 42]
of Trent, was moved from one of the central pillars to a corresponding niche on the left of the apse. Soon afterwards the gigantic bronze figure of the blessing Pope was cast. Grander, more dramatically solemn than in any other representation, he sits far above the pilgrim, cut off even from the allegorical virtues well below, his right hand raised in an authoritative gesture that seems as keen to command or to ward off his enemies as to bless. There for eight years the tomb rested while Urban VIII overwhelmed
Bernini with commissions designed to satisfy his more immediate ambitions. In 1639 work was resumed. The suave and attractive marble Charity accompanied by two putti was carved, followed by the grim, skeletal Death emerging from the sarcophagus to record on his scroll the name of Urbanus VIII Barberinus Pontifex Maximus. Again work stopped, and in May 1644 the now dying Pope, who carefully examined all these projects, made a final attempt to get the tomb finished in time. It was too late, and
Justice was only completed in 1647 at a moment, ironically enough, when the Barberini had been driven from Rome for their part in exploiting the resources of the city for their own ends.
The strange confusions inherent in Urban VIII’s patronage of religious foundations are even more obvious in his dealings with the church of S. Maria della Concezione.1
His younger brother Antonio was a Capuchin monk, a retiring and not very intelligent man afflicted with a paralysing shyness, the only member of his family to be genuinely reluctant to accept the inevitable honours and titles that accompanied his brother’s accession. Though made Cardinal di S. Onofrio, he continued to live as simply as his new circumstances would allow. In 1626 he decided to have built for his Order a new church and monastery adjoining the estates of Cardinal Ludovisi on the Pincio. A
Capuchin architect was entrusted with the task and drew up a plan of extreme simplicity as befitted his Order. Urban VIII, however, was not the man to countenance such austerity and, undeterred by any of the inhibitions of his brother, he soon began to take the scheme in hand. He laid the foundation stone, visited the building and made over
. large sums for its erection. As it neared completion great figures from all over Europe competed for the opportunity to be associated with such a fashionable church so near to the Pope’s heart. The Holy Roman Emperor asked to be allowed to build ‘with royal munificence’ a chapel dedicated to the Blessed Felice da Cantalice. In Rome Cardinal
Magalotti accumulated precious stones and marbles for one dedicated to St Lawrence.
Prince Peretti had similar plans. And then the Capuchins themselves intervened. When
- they heard that ‘the Pope planned to have the altars built and decorated with precious stones as was the modern fashion in'Roman churches . . . they humbly beseeched him to be pleased to condescend to the simplicity of our state . . ., and not to grant, under the guise of favours, special dispensations and allowances to our Order’. The Pope was moved by their plea and withdrew the permission he had given to foreign princes.
But respect for Capuchin austerity was not his only motive: ‘he did not think it right that others should play a part in the church . . . and that other princes’ arms should be
Domenico da Isnello.

[Page 43]
seen there besides those of his own family’. And so it was agreed that the Barberini only should be responsible for the decoration and that the chapels should be made not of precious marbles but of wood—‘though of fine quality and suitable for such princes’.
So far so good—but soon there was further trouble. Cardinal S. Onofrio ordered a dozen candlesticks and two crucifixes, all of wood, and sent them to the church. He had stuck to his part of the bargain, but the Capuchin monks found them ‘extremely curious and not like those used by our Order’. So ‘with the most humble thanks’ they sent them back. This time their protest met with no response. The Pope insisted; and the candlesticks were accepted. The same occurred with the High Altar. Urban VIII himself had had designed a bronze tabernacle and metal candelabra similar to those in his family chapel at S. Andrea della Valle with bronze candlesticks and an ‘iron grating, well cast and elegant, adorned with metal or bronze’. So that these could be accepted, he ordered a special dispensation from the rules of simplicity which governed the decoration of Capuchin churches. This was exactly what they had dreaded. Fighting a lonely rearguard action in a society where riches and devotion had come to be treated as synonymous, they once again pleaded for their poverty. The Pope must have been bewildered; he was certainly adamant. The tabernacle had to be accepted, but as a concession he agreed that it should be made of pietrefine and not of bronze and that the candelabra could be omitted.
For the altar pictures the Pope and his brother commissioned works by the older generation of artists with whom they had been familiar in their youth—Guido Reni was written to in Bologna and sent The Archangel Michael trampling on the Devil, a work whose classical and somewhat mannered grace made it among the most admired of its time1; Domenichino and Lanfranco contributed other paintings, as did the young
Barberini favourite Pietro da Cortona (and his master Baccio Ciarpi) and the still younger Andrea Sacchi. For a new generation of Barberini, the nephews, also took a part in this stage of the decoration. '

**Footnotes:**
1 See the comments of the Venetian ambassadors in Barozzi e Berchet, I, pp. 153-4.
2 ibid., I, p. 228.
3 ibid., I, p. 230.
4 ibid., I, p. 200.
5 Baglione; p. 4—of Pope Gregory XIII, quoted by Orbaan, 1920, p. xv.
1 Pastor, XIII, p. 865. As, for instance, The forge os Vulcan in Pietro da Cortona’s ceiling fresco in the Barberini palace; also one of the tapestries designed for the palace to represent scenes from Urban’s life— see later, p. 60. The Pope’s defence of Rome was also intended to be shown allegorically on one of the walls of the palace—Pastor, XIII, p. 969.
2 See below, p. 40, note 3. ,
3 Gabriel Naudé—quoted by Pintard, p. 262.
1 Passeri, p. 352.
2 ‘Cav.re Gio. Lorenzo Bernini Napoletano, o Fiorentino come egli vuole,’ wrote Passeri sarcastically —p. 169.
3 BaMinucci, 1948, p. 80.
4 P. Romano, p. 41.
5 For the documents see Pollak, 1931, II, pp. 306 ff., and Pastor, XIII, pp. 939-47.
1 For the origins of the famous epigram ‘Quod non fecerunt Barbari, fecerunt Barberini’ see Pastor, XIII, p. 868, note 1, and p. 940, note 8.
2 Pollak, 1931, II, passim. Pastor’s statement (XIII, p. 232) that Ginnasi was unpopular with the Spaniards is difficult to understand in view of the document that he himself publishes on p. 1004 and constant reports about Ginnasi’s Hispanophil tendencies from the Venetian envoys.
3 Pollak, 1931, II, p. 426.
1 Wittkower, 1935, pp. 192-3.
2 Pascoli, II, p. 428 for Bernini’s choice of Bolgi.
3 Passeri, p. 236.
1 Fraschetti, p. 107, publishes an avviso from the Este Resident in Rome dated 8 January 1633 (Borghese died in October): ‘Il Cavalier Bernini di commissione del Papa ha fatto in marmo la testa de Cardinal Borghese che ha donato in ricompensa 500 zeahini et un diamante di 150 scudi.’
2 Wittkower, 1955, pp. 200 and 202.
3 Wittkower, 1955, p. 201, and Gould, 1958.
4 Pastor, XIII, p. 955. For the documents see Pollak, 1927, I, pp. 22-30.
6 Wittkower, 1955, p. 186, and for this whole chapter the same author, 1958.
1 Ceccarelli, 1946, and, above all, the life of Marcello by Jan Niceo Eritreo [G. V. Rossi] in Pinacotheca, III, pp. 26-33.
2 Borzelli, 1898, pp. 164 ff.
3 For the fullest account of Marino’s relations with artists and his collections see Borzelli’s rare pamphlet of 1891, and Ackerman, 1961.
4 This is tire account given by Passeri, p. 375. There are inevitably other versions of the meeting.
1 See Chapter 1, p. 11, note 1.
2 Incisa della Rocchetta, 1924, pp. 60-76.
3 Vita Ji C. Ai. Battalia—Soprani, I, p. 303.
4 Passeri, p. 378. For inventories of the Sacchetti collection, most of which is now in the Pinacoteca Capitolina, see the sources referred to by Brigand, 1957, pp. 5-14.
1 Bonomelli, pp. 41-69.
2 Alfred de Terrebasse, p. 40.
3 Urban VIII’s astrological pursuits are well documented—see the astonishing material published by D. P. Walker, pp. 205 if. which shows that Campanella helped him in his researches. The rather sinister spying on Campanella hi Paris which was ordered by the Barberini (see Bazzoni) ‘to prevent him revealing anything without special permission from His Holiness as he promised before leaving Rome’ must certainly be connected with these activities. See also A. Bertolotti, 1878.
4 Such as—despite all its deeper'implications—his treatment of Galileo.
5 Wittkower, 1955, p. 184.
1 ibid., p. 199.
2 ibid., p. 191.
3 Pecchiai, 1959, pp. 130 ff.
4 Wittkower, 1955, p. 193.
5 Feliciangeli.
0 These are now scattered ail over the world. The most famous are the two great Seaports in the National GaJIery and the Louvre—for the complété list see Rothlisberger, 1961, p. 153.
1 Passeri, p. 153, and Pollak, 1927, I, pp. 165-72. Above all see the well-documented study by P.
1 Malvasia, II, p. 26.
2 Barozzi e Berchet, I, p. 214.