# 03 CHP-3 sec ii

The Gesù, the principal church of the Jesuits, was built for them by the most powerful of sixteenth-century Cardinals, Alessandro Farnese.3 His assumption of its patronage in
1568 had at first seemed like a wonderful gift from Heaven; it soon became clear that there were many drawbacks. The Cardinal treated the new church as his private property—it used to be said, in a phrase that reveals much about the spiritual confusion of a Renaissance prelate surviving into the Counter Reformation, that he owned the three most beautiful objects in Rome: his family palace, his daughter Clelia and the church of the Gesù. Farnese paid no attention to the wishes of the Jesuits; he employed his own architect Vignola and his own painters. None of this mattered very much as

[Page 66]
long as he lived, for his schemes were as grandiose as could be desired. He commissioned
Girolamo Muziano to paint The Circumcision for the High Altar; Giovanni de’ Vecchi began frescoes on the pendentives and the dome, ‘very lavish with various adornments and putti’; plans were made for the apse to be covered with mosaics.1 But when he died in 1589, with the decoration scarcely begun, the effect was disastrous. Not only did work stop immediately, but as Farnese had specifically reserved the adornment of the tribune
, and the High Altar exclusively for his family, nothing could be done without the permission of his heirs. These showed a total lack of interest in the whole matter and for generations the Jesuits were unable, despite repeated efforts, to-carry on with the decoration. They were thus compelled to concentrate on the side-chapels.
These chapels had a great attraction for pious ladies belonging to those older aristocratic families of Rome, such as the Orsini, the Caetani, the Meliini, which were already being submerged in wealth and political importance by the new rich who made up the papal entourage. Some of them introduced their own artists, men Eke Scipione
Pulzone, Agostino Ciampelh and Federigo Zuccari; others paid for the main structure of the chapel, but left the essential decoration in the hands of the Jesuits. Forced back on their own resources, the Society cut down the expense by employing as principal painter one of their own members, Padre Valeriano, whose crudity and clumsiness can be benevolently interpreted as mystery and power.2 When they moved outside their own ranks and commissioned an estabEshed painter their fmancial weakness became dangerously obvious. Five years after producing a picture of The Resurrection Giovanni
Baglione was forced to complain to the Pope that he had not yet been fully paid by the
Jesuit fathers but was constantly being put off ‘with good words and the excuse that they had no funds for the moment’.
In these circumstances it is not surprising that the decoration of the Gesù in its early stages, far from reflecting any concerted Jesuit plan, was in fact achieved only haphazardly and with the greatest difficulty. An informed visitor inspecting the church in about 1623 (or even 1663) would have found an element of richness in the display of coloured marbles but a thoroughly old-fashioned atmosphere about the halfcompleted frescoes and altar paintings.3 Not a single one of the Bolognese artists who had helped to transform church decoration at the beginning of the century was represented. For all its grandeur, and despite the impression it made on a raw English traveller, the general effect must have been a little bleak.
But the Gesù, which was designed for public worship, was not the only Jesuit church in Rome. They were just as concerned with the more private training of their own novices many of whom would be sent abroad on horribly dangerous missions.
In the venerable early Christian temple of S. Stefano Rotondo, which they had been
Spirito: Rom. 143, f. 251.

[Page 67]
allotted by Gregory XIII,1 a truly Jesuit style was brought into being for the first time.
The church was given to the German college, and the rector commissioned from
Nicolo Circignani dalle Pomarance a series of exceedingly brutal frescoes designed to illustrate the martyrdoms of early Christian saints mostly enacted under the late Roman empire. They were deliberately painted in great detail (curiously enough a last feeble glimmer of the Venetian High Renaissance lingers in the murderous subjects), the explanation of the torture was attached to each fresco, and the Jesuits took a certain pride in these innovations of subject-matter and treatment.2
Indeed they planned to adopt them in the third church that they owned in Rome.
This was another early Christian building, S. Vitale, which was given to the Society by
Clement VIII.3 The decoration was directed by a Jesuit painter Giovanni Battista
Fiammeri under the immediate control of the General, Claudio Aquaviva, who took a strong personal interest in the scheme and made suggestions of his own.4 Once again the subjects were almost exclusively concerned with torture, but in the generation that had passed since the decoration of S. Stefano Rotondo the atmosphere had so relaxed that the true nature of the frescoes is not at first apparent. Rather, they give the impression of idyllic pastoral landscapes (in the nineteenth century they were attributed to
Gaspard Poussin), and it is not until we have examined them and the inscriptions below with some care that we see that nailed to one tree is a martyr, and that in some distant valley, shaded by hills, is a soldier undergoing the most exquisite tortures. Only in the choir were the painters encouraged to throw off their restraint—here the exact mechanism of how to pull a man to pieces is displayed with the cold, clinical observation that comes naturally to those to whom such sights are familiar.
In practice, therefore, the contribution to patronage made by the Jesuits had been exceedingly limited, however startling. This was largely due to their desperate shortage of funds. The decoration both of another little church, S. Andrea al Quirinale,5 and of
S. Vitale was constantly being held up for this reason, and the correspondence of General
Aquaviva is often concerned with the problem of how to raise more money—jewels to be sold, gifts to be solicited and so on.6 But the very austerity which they were compelled to adopt could, if necessary, be turned to good account. In 1611 a French
Jesuit Louis Richeôme wrote a book, which he dedicated to Aquaviva, about the

[Page 68]
paintings in S. Andrea and S. Vitale.1 Extravagant pomp, he said, was nothing: he had no use for the fake pilasters and columns, or the marble altars with which the Society had pathetically tried to enrich their churches. ‘Car les ordonnances du tableau, ces colonnes Ioniques, couronnées de volutes; ces pilastres, ces corniches et piédestals,
& autres peintures, & reliefs, ornements d’architecture ne touchent point votre dévotion... . .' Attention must be concentrated exclusively on the subject-matter of the frescoes, which should be read like a sermon, more effective because paint lasted and words vanished. But Richeôme’s was a last, lonely voice from the harsher days of the
Counter Reformation, valid more because it justified an unwanted simphcity than because it proclaimed a doctrine that was at all likely to be followed in the more prosperous and relaxed age of Urban VIII.
During the first twenty years of the seventeenth century the contribution made to the artistic Efe of Rome by the Oratorians was. very much more impressive than that of the Jesuits.2 There was both in their selection of artists and in the inspiration that they provided for them a fineness of taste and a sense of exaltation that for long made them true pioneers among the reEgious Orders of the Counter Reformation. This is not altogether surprising. Despite their insistence on powerful visual imagery as a help for devotion, none of the Jesuit leaders showed any subtlety of appreciation. St Philip Neri, on the other hand, was a man of the profoundest aesthetic sensibility who responded passionately to painting and music. He naturally attracted to himself many of the most cultivated spirits of the time and he personally took an enthusiastic interest in the decoration of his church. Moreover, the circumstances of its construction were very different from those of the Gesù.
S. Maria deUa Vallicclla was assigned to him in 1575 by Pope Gregory XIII. It lay in the very heart of fashionable and cultivated Rome. It was, however, immediately felt to be too small and was pulled down to be replaced by a larger budding of the same name, often caUed the Chiesa Nuova. St Philip’s early biographers delighted to tell how the saint, with his unEmited trust in divine providence, ordered the destruction of the old church without any idea of where he would get the money from with which to build the new; and how this faith was rewarded by the people of Rome, rich and poor alike, who flooded him with generous contributions. This attractive story is not wholly accurate—there were grave financial difficulties, and Cardinal Farnese, jealous of this potential rival to ‘his’ Gesù, was obstructive—but it illustrates one very significant point about the new church: it did not depend for its construction and decoration entirely on the goodwiE of one aU-powerful patron. St PhiEp himself worked in close co-operation with the architect Matteo da Castello whom the Oratorians chose and the church was built on the same general lines as those of the Gesù. The foundation stone was laid in 1575 by Alessandro de’ Medici, Archbishop of Florence and ambassador of the Grand Duke, and at first work proceeded quickly. However, the usual financial

[Page 69]
difficulties soon intervened, and the Oratorians were now compelled to turn to a patron.
Cardinal Pier Donato Cesi was obviously very much under the influence of Cardinal
Farnese. He shared his love of art and of splendour and many of his plans were directly based on those of the older and more powerful figure. When, therefore, he agreed to pay for the completion of the Chiesa Nuova, he went out of his way to insist that he should enjoy the same rights as those of Farnese in the Gesù. His arms too were to be set up in the church, and he and his family were to enjoy overriding privileges in the affairs of the Congregation. His terms were accepted, but he interfered little enough in the building of the church and some years after his death in 1586, his brother Angelo
Cesi, Bishop of Todi, continued the family patronage.
The Oratorians thus kept the affairs of the Chiesa Nuova largely in their own hands.
Martino Longhi the Elder replaced Matteo da Castello as architect and by 1590 the main structure was complete, though the façade by Fausto Rughesi was not erected for another sixteen years. St Philip Neri insisted that the walls and the vault should be merely whitewashed and not decorated with stucco, though whether for reasons of taste or economy is not clear. The chapels were then dedicated to the mysteries of the
Virgin, the High Altar being assigned to Her Nativity and those in the transepts to Her
Presentation and Her Coronation.
In 1582, well before the completion of the church, the Oratorians had commissioned an altar painting to be placed in the Chapel of the Visitation. For this they turned to Federico Barocci in Urbino. The tender, feminine, almost morbid delicacy of his picture, with its soft, smoky colouring, which reached Rome four years later, made a special appeal to the mystical strand in St Philip’s nature. We hear that ‘he would sit on a small chair in front of it and all unconsciously be rapt into a sweet ecstasy’. Then the down-to-earth side of his character would reassert itself: irritated by the women who came to gaze at him, he would have them angrily sent away and would do all in his power to conceal the effects of the picture on him. Not surprisingly the Oratorians were anxious to obtain other works by the same artist: they were unsuccessful in getting from him an altarpiece of the Coronation of the Virgin, but they managed to commission one of The Presentation of Jesus in the Temple. Another artist especially popular with the
Congregation was Pomerancio, for he had painted St Philip’s portrait, as well as an altarpiece showing St Domitilla with a rapt expression, eyes raised and mouth half open, between Saints Nereus and Achilleus in Cardinal Baronio’s titular church of that name. - -
In fact, however, the Oratorians, like the Jesuits, generally allowed the rich families who took over the chapels to be responsible for their decoration, and the result was to change the character of the church and make it difficult for us to speak of a definite
‘Oratorian’ taste. Many of the new patrons were Florentines, like St Philip himself, often of great culture, and thus it was that the paintings in their chapels were sometimes of high merit. But with their intervention there was introduced a new note—of variety, richness and colour. The same process had occurred many years earlier in the musical performances for which the Oratorians were so famous. ‘Some years ago’, wrote the

[Page 70]
composer Giovanni Animuccia as early as 1563, ‘I published my first book of Landi for the consolation of those who came to the Oratory of S. Girolamo. In these I tried to maintain a certain simplicity which I thought suitable to the words themselves, the nature of that place of devotion and to the end I had in view which was only to excite devotion. But the aforesaid Oratory having, by the grace of God, steadily grown by reason of the concourse of prelates and most distinguished gentlemen, it has seemed proper to me in this second book to develop the harmonies and to give variety to the music—composing it sometimes to Latin words and sometimes to Italian, sometimes to many voices, sometimes to fewer, sometimes with one kind of rhyme, sometimes with another; but I have refrained as far as I can from the complications of fugues and other devices so as not to obscure the sense of the words: so that their power, helped by harmony, may the more sweetly penetrate the hearts of those who listen.’ In other words, the presence of ‘prelates and most distinguished gentlemen’ led to the artist relaxing his austerity and relying on more attractive and varied means to touch the emotions of his new patrons.
This inherent conflict between the Congregation itself and the fashionable society that flocked to it is apparent also in the decoration of the church. Alessandro Vittrice, who in about 1601 commissioned a picture from Caravaggio of The Entombment os
Christ for his family chapel, was the nephew of one of St Philip’s closest friends, and it is therefore possible that the Oratorians welcomed the picture. In any case Caravaggio seems to have taken special trouble to produce a somewhat more orthodox treatment than he was accustomed to—the circumstances of the commission have not yet been clarified.1 The way in which the next great picture entered the church is, however, entirely characteristic of the pressures at work on the Oratorians.
The High Altar had been originally dedicated to the Nativity; its decoration had been promised by Cardinal Angelo Cesi. In about 1605, however, two extremely important events occurred.2 A majority of the Oratorians, after much debating, decided to move to the High Altar a ‘miraculous’ image of the Madonna and Child, preserved from the original church, and the money set aside for its decoration was found to have been absorbed in the unexpected expenses of the façade. In 1606 Cardinal Cesi died.
At this moment of crisis, when the Oratorians were faced with a situation so familiar to the Jesuits, they were approached by a highly influential cleric, Monsignor Giacomo
Serra. He was interested in an artist whom he was particularly anxious to promote,,a young Flemish painter Peter Paul Rubens.3 If the Oratorians would agree to Rubens being assigned the altarpiece Serra would pay 300 scudi towards its cost, leaving only a bonus to be defrayed by the fathers themselves. Coming at that moment, the offer was very tempting. And yet the Oratorians were cautious. They had never heard of this man, and the thought of giving the main commission in their church to a Flemish artist when there were so many Italians around was clearly repugnant to them. But Serra

[Page 71]
There is every reason to believe that the Oratorians were delighted with the result, but it was undeniable that, as had occurred earlier with music, the pressures of ‘prelates and most distinguished gentlemen’ had wholly altered the nature of their church.
Rubens had faithfully interpreted the instructions which had probably been handed to him by the Oratorian historian Cardinal Baronio, but the spirit of the painting was quite his own and, despite his great admiration for both artists, utterly unlike the altarpieces of Barocci or Caravaggio. It blazed with Venetian colour and vitality and radiated an exuberant pathos which was later to prove of crucial importance for the development of Bernini and Pietro da Cortona. Thus quite by accident the Chiesa
Nuova became one of the cradles of the Baroque. But an Order which could assimilate within a period of fifteen years masterpieces by Barocci, Caravaggio and Rubens, to say nothing of minor works by other artists, cannot be said to have had a specific and individual ‘taste’ of its own. And it was not long before important contributions from
Guido Reni, Alessandro Algardi and others added to the stature of the church and also proved who were the real patrons within it.
So austere had the Theatines been that the word lingered on as a nickname for special gravity.1 In building and decorating their church they too experienced the advantages and drawbacks of princely support.2 In 1582 a legacy from Donna Costanza
Piccolomini d’Aragona gave them a palace in the centre of Rome and the little adjoining church of S. Sebastiano—it also obliged them to found a church dedicated to St Andrew, the patron saint of Amalfi of which Donna Costanza had been duchess. Soon afterwards the Neapolitan Cardinal Gesualdo agreed to build them a large new church, but—just as Cardinal Farnese had done in the Gesù—he insisted that his own architects, first
Giacomo della Porta and then Pietro Paolo Olivieri, should have complete authority over the man whom the Theatines themselves had proposed for the commission.
After the death of Gesualdo in 1603 there was the usual delay, with the church, already planned as ‘one of the most magnificent to be seen’, by no means complete. Finally in
1608 Cardinal Peretti-Montalto, despising the advice ‘not to carry on with a building begun by others’, took it in hand and guaranteed the vast sum of 160,000 gold scudi.
He brought in the best known architect in Rome, Carlo Maderno, and work proceeded

[Page 72]
quickly enougli for the ambitious young Maffeo Barberini to start planning his family chapel a year later, followed soon after by a number of other Florentine families, ‘each of whom is straining to make his chapel more beautiful than that of the others so that it will be the most beautiful church in Rome’.1
Cardinal Montalto, as was usual in the circumstances, had reserved the main features of the decoration for himself, and he too had grandiose plans. In about 1616 he promised
Giovanni Lanfranco, who was then working for him elsewhere, that when the time came he would be entrusted with the entire tribune and dome—by far the largest commission of its kind yet given to a single artist. However, in 162s Pope Paul V died and was succeeded by Gregory XV, whose nephew Cardinal Ludovisi was the particular patron of Domenichino. That artist, reluctant to miss such a wonderful opportunity, approached Ludovisi and asked to be given the commission instead of Lanfranco.
Ludovisi had no rights whatsoever in the church, but, as Passeri succinctly pointed out, he had all the irresistible power that came from his position as papal nephew and he began to apply it to Montalto.2 The pressure was naturally decisive, and Domenichino was given the job. However, Montalto then made a determined effort to reassert his rights, and insisted that Lanfranco should at least be given the dome. To Domenichino’s somewhat unreasonable fury this compromise was agreed upon, and the two artists, by now irreconcilable enemies, shared tire commission. The Theatines, it need hardly be said, played no part whatsoever in these decisions.
For all the trouble it had caused, the decoration of S. Andrea della Valle was by far the most important achievement of the Baroque as yet. Lanfranco’s dome, which was completed in 1627,3 was the first of its kind since Correggio’s in Parma more than a century earlier and it served as a model to artists for the next hundred years. Light is the centre, radiating out from Christ, its source in the lantern, and gradually filling the whole surface, around which the choirs of saints, martyrs, prophets, apostles and cherubs hymn their praises. Towards that light the Virgin gazes in ecstasy, her arms outstretched both to welcome it and to point out with an expressive gesture the adoring figures on each side of her—St Andrew who sponsors S. Gaetano, founder of the Theatine order, and St Peter with St Andrew Avellino, the Theatine beatified in 1624 when the fresco was probably begun...
Meanwhile Domenichino was at work on his share of the commission. Breaking away from his more classical manner, he produced in the pendentives four monumental figures of the Evangelists, clearly derived from Michelangelo and stored with potential energy, surrounded by putti, traditional emblems and the arms of his reluctant patron.
In the apse he portrayed scenes from the life of St Andrew. By 1628, when both artists had completed their tasks, there could be no doubt that S. Andrea della Valle was the finest modern church in Rome and that the Theatines without much effort on their part had far outdistanced the Jesuits and the Oratorians.

[Page 13]
Pietro da Cortona: Glorification, of the Reign of Urban VIII

[Page 14]
Gaulle Triumph of Name'ofJesus on nave of Gesù

[Page 15]
Andrea Pozzo: Modello for fresco on vault o£ S. Ignazio, Rome

[Page 16]
lanirinO
1n
aerdnA.SFo
roiretni
:
ïNIN
ïte
B

[Page 73]
— iii —
It is an ironical fact that for all the general benevolence shown towards the Jesuits by the Barberini it should have been left to the chief rival and bitter enemy of the family to have built a second great church for the Society. Cardinal Ludovico Ludovisi was an intelligent and energetic young man who had enjoyed for only two years the privileges and status of papal nephew. He had made the most of them. With the riches poured on him by his uncle Gregory XV he had accumulated vast estates in and around Rome, built up what was possibly the finest collection of antique sculpture ever seen in the city, and patronised the leading artists of his native Emilia to marvellous effect, as is shown by Guercino’s fresco of Aurora on the ceiling of the casino on the Pincio which he had bought from Cardinal del Monte. The Pope was old at the time of his election and in constant ill-health; Cardinal Ludovisi had thus been a powerful figure politically and had acted in the interests of Spain. In the conclave of 1623 which followed his uncle’s death he did what he could to prevent the election of Maffeo Barberini. He failed in this aim and paid the inevitable price. After a succession of disputes with the new Pope, he was at one stage ordered to return to his archbishopric at Bologna on pain of being sent there by force. He died after a stormy life in 1632 at the age of 37.1
In 1622 Cardinal Ludovisi decided to use a significant proportion of his immense wealth on building a new church for the Jesuits to be dedicated to St Ignatius. His affection for the Society went back to his school days, and he decided that the building, for which he at once laid down 100,000 scudi, should be ‘second to none for size and beauty’. But his first move was not a success. He had planned it near the novitiate of
S. Andrea. The Pope at once objected as he said that the height of the new building would interfere with his view from the Quirinal. So Cardinal Ludovisi moved it next to the Collegio Romano, the Jesuit college in the centre of Rome,2 and building began in 1626. From now on his difficulties were to be with the Jesuits themselves.
The situation of the Society had greatly altered since the days when they had quietly accepted the instructions of the all-powerful Cardinal Farnese. Indeed, Cardinal
Ludovisi himself explained that his admiration for the Jesuits was partly due to ‘the power and authority that they have over nearly all princes’.3 Now he too was to experience this power, though its workings can only be dimly discerned through the inferences and hints of contemporary authors. All sources agree that Cardinal Ludovisi organised a competition for the architect, and that among those who submitted plans was
Domenichino, his special protege. Then the mystery begins. Passeri, the artist’s great friend, is strangely reticent4: ‘... and Domenico was among those who competed; but
God knows what fate dealt out to him: indeed there is no point in talking of the matter’.
Bellori, on the other hand, is much more explicit.5 He says that Domenichino made
Nepote di Papa Greg. XV scritta da me Antonio Giunti Suo Servitore da Urbino—Biblioteca Corsini, Rome,
MSS. 39. D. 8. 3 ibid. 4 Passeri, pp. 66-7.

[Page 74]
several drawings for Cardinal Ludovisi, but that some Jesuits then went to the artist’s house ‘and told him not to bother about the matter; because they wanted to follow the design of the Gesù. This was the first and most beautiful of their churches and had served as a model for others. Domenico answered that they ought to be pleased to have two models, and that he would suggest an alternative; but it was all in vain.’ In the end a Jesuit father, Orazio Grassi, of no architectural experience but celebrated for a controversy with Galileo, was appointed. An eighteenth-century account says that Domenichino withdrew from the whole affair in a fury when Grassi made an amalgam of the two designs that he had submitted, both of which were criticised by the Jesuits.1 The
Jesuit sources, on the other hand, do not mention Domenichino but merely say that
Cardinal Ludovisi chose Grassi’s plan from a number that had been proposed to him.2
It is clear that the pressure must have been considerable. Although Ludovisi continued during the few remaining years of his Use to show great interest in the construction and insisted on a committee of architects, including the painter Domenichino and Carlo
Maderno, closely examining all Grassi’s plans, the evidence suggests that he was patron in name and financial aid rather than in any control he might exert. One of his last acts before dying was to leave the Society a further 100,000 ducats.3
The Jesuits had taken so much trouble to keep control in their own hands in order to reproduce on a larger scale the essential elements of the Gesù. But the church was intended to serve for the students of the Coliegio Romano rather than for the general public, and the patronage of the side chapels was not therefore entrusted to the Roman patrician families but was assumed by the Jesuits themselves. That being the case, money had to be economised, and the Society therefore followed its usual policy in the circumstances. It turned to one of its own members to carry on with the decoration. In this instance the artist was a young Frenchman, Pierre de Lattre, from St Omer who had entered the novitiate of S. Andrea in 1626.4 Two years later he went to the Coliegio
Romano, where he remained until his death in 1683. His obituary tells us that he led an exemplary life and that he painted all the pictures that were to be seen at that date in the church and sacristy of S. Ignatio. His name first appears in the account books in 1638 and turns up repeatedly for a dozen years. During that time he frescoed the vault of the sacristy, completed six pictures for the side chapels and painted an imitation altar on the inner wall of the apse. The little of his work that has survived shows him to have been an utterly insignificant artist.
Cardinal Ludovisi had died in 1632, and as usual in such cases his heirs proved reluctant to carry on with the great expenditure that was still needed. In 1640 the first mass could be celebrated in the new church, but it still had no vault. Not for another ten years was it finally opened to the public; even then it was half unfinished and

[Page 75]
for another full generation the temple that was to have been so ‘magnificent’ lay white and bare.1 Once again the Jesuits had been outdistanced by their rivals.
During the reign of Urban VIII the Oratorians commissioned two works which were of very great consequence for the development of Baroque art—a fresco by Pietro da Cortona on the ceiling of their sacristy and a building adjoining the Chiesa Nuova by Borromini to accommodate the library and the concerts of religious music for which they were famous.
Pietro’s small frescoes of Angels carrying the Instruments of the Passion and of St Philip in Ecstasy (in a chapel in one of the saint’s rooms), though in themselves not very important, were of great significance for the future. For they began his close association with the Oratorians which was to lead to his transforming their whole church, and began it at a time when he was already the most fashionable and powerful artist in
Rome. Indeed, Pietro, was compelled to interrupt his work on the ceiling of the Barberini palace towards the end of 1633 in order to fulfil his obligations to the Chiesa
Nuova, and the fact that he was allowed to do so suggests that the Oratorians must at that time have been exceedingly influential at court.2
The choice of Borromini as architect for the Oratorio was made by one of the fathers living there, Virgilio Spada.3 He and his brother Cardinal Bernardino were both protégés of Urban VIII and enthusiastic connoisseurs. In the great sixteenth-century palace near that of the Farnese which Bernardino acquired from the Mignanelli in 1632 there was assembled an exceedingly rich collection of pictures, many of them from
Bologna, where the Cardinal had served as legate between 1627 and 1631.4 Virgilio was more interested in architecture—he himself was a dilettante who many years later helped to design the richly coloured family chapel in S. Girolamo della Carità—and he was a special admirer of Borromini whom he was to employ on certain alterations in the palace and on the construction of an illusionistic colonnade in the garden.
' When Borromini began work on the Oratorio in 1637 he had just begun to make an outstanding name for himself. For many years he had been employed on comparatively minor tasks under Maderno and Bernini, but his wholly individual personality and principles made a dispute with the great Barberini architect inevitable. Thereafter he was largely kept away from official commissions until the death of Urban VIII.6
In 1634 he had been entrusted with the building of a monastery and church for the
Discalced Trinitarians who had left their original base in Spain and settled in Rome at thé beginning of the century. The site adjoining the Quattro Fontane, very near the Barberini palace, was particularly small and inconvenient, and a great measure of the enthusiastic praise which Borromini received was unquestionably due to the

[Page 76]
highly ingenious manner in which he solved the problems it posed.1 However, it was also recognised that the style marked a radical departure from anything that had hitherto been seen in Rome.2 This originality, as well as Borromini’s cheapness, was a cause of special satisfaction to the Scalzi. ‘The plan of the church,’ they wrote, ‘is so exceptional in everybody’s opinion that it seems that nothing like it with regard to artistic merit, caprice, excellence and singularity can be found anywhere in the world....’
. This was written some years later, but in 1637, when Borromini was asked to design the Oratorio, his plans for the Scalzi church were already known, and there can therefore be no doubt that the Oratorians were deliberately hoping for an architect whom their
Trinitarian brothers found admirable for his revolutionary qualities.
These qualities found expression chiefly in the façade, where the delicate subtlety of the broken curves matched the emotional tone of the music that was played within.
Like Barocci many years earlier, Borromini was able to interpret that particular strain of Counter Reformation sensibility, tormented, attenuated yet sensuously appealing, that was the special contribution of the Oratorians and that had no counterpart in the more rough-and-ready spirits of the Jesuits.

**Footnotes:**
1 For the contract with Muziano see Ugo da Como, p. 186; for the frescoes by Giovanni de’ Vecchi see Baglione, p. 128; for Cardinal Farnese’s plans for mosaics see MSS. in Jesuits Archives, Borgo S.
2 See the b illiant interpretation of Valeriano’s style in Zeri, 1957, and the present writer’s review, 1958, p. 396.....
3 See the Sacchi painting and the description of 1650 in Pecchiai, p. 104.
1 Armellini, I, p. 160.
2 Jesuit Archives—MSS. Rom. 185, f. 25: Nécrologie del P. Michele Lauretano, scritto dal P. Fabio de Fabiis,i 6 Agosto 1610—‘Fu il primo che io sappia che cominciasse a far dipingere nelle chiese li Martirii patiti da S.ti Martiri per la confessione di Christo, con le sue note che dichiarono le persone et le qualità de tormenti, come si vede in S.to Stefano Rotondo; et dopo fù seguitato et imitato da molti akri.’ An anonymous Latin life of the same rector (ibid., Rom. 188,1, ff. 81-82) says that the example he set was followed in other Jesuit churches.
3 Huetter e Golzio.
4 See the interesting letter from Aquaviva to Fiammeri of 22 August 1599 published by Pirri, 1952, p. 4.
5 For the history of this which was pulled down to make way for Bernini’s church see the account written between 1606 and 1612 by P. Ottavio Novaroli in Jesuit Archives—Historia Domus Professae Romae—Rom. 162, ff. 2-184.
6 ibid., MSS. Med. 22, f. I432.
1 Richeôme, p. 21. It must be remembered that these churches were intended for Jesuit novices and not for the general public.
2 I have derived this account of the early history of the Chiesa Nuova from two fully documented works which frequently refer back to the original sources: Strong, and Ponnelle and Bordet.
1 Friedlaender, p. 187, and Cozzi, p. 51.
2 Jaffé.
3 Serra was also a patron of the young Guercino—see Mahon, 1947, pp. 67-71.
71 said that if they did not accept his terms he would give away his money elsewhere, and so, rather reluctantly, they agreed. They laid down stringent conditions. Rubens must show them examples of his work, he must contribute towards the cost of the picture, he must paint exactly what they told him: the Virgin and Child above, and below six saints particularly venerated in the church. All this was agreed to and Rubens painted the picture to their entire satisfaction. He then himself found that the lighting was unsatisfactory, and persuaded the Oratorians to accept a wholly new proposal-—a central picture to enclose the miraculous Virgin and Child and two lateral ones, each with three of the six saints. All were to be painted on slate to avoid reflections of light.
1 Cozzi, p. 46, and Formelle and Bordet, p. 343.
2 Ortolani, and, above all, Hibbard, 1961, pp. 289-318.
1 Avviso of 30 April 1608, quoted by Orbaan, 1920, pp. 107-8.
2 Passeri, pp. 45 and 148.
3 Pastor, XIII, p. 965, note 3.
1 Pastor, XIII, p. 445. For all available information about his collections see Felici.
2 Jesuit Archives, No. 1238—ia theca; Vitae satti di Ludovico, Card. Ludovisi d.o S.R.C. Vice cancel.
8 Bellori, p. 350. Pope-Hennessy (1948, p. 121, No. 1741) publishes a drawing by Domenichino probably connected with his project for S. Ignazio.
1 Soprani, II, p. 10.
2 MS. by P. Gerolamo Nappi (1584-1648) quoted by [Bricarelli], 1924.
3 Besides the documents in Pollak, 1927, I, pp. 144-58, see Libra Mastro A of the church in the Jesuit Archives. See also Hibbard, 1971, pp. 232-4.
4 Besides repeated entries in Libra Mastro A see Galassi Paluzzi, 1926, p. 542.
1 Jesuit Archives: No. 1238—Ia theca: actorum ac diversarum cartarum inscripta: Ecclesia 5. Ignatii de Urbe: saec. XVII-XIX, Mi infra—Notizie storiche della Chiesa, 1712.
2 For the date see Pollak, 1927, I, p. 436, and Brigand, 1962, p. 205.
3 Passeri, p. 262.
4 For Spada and his collections see Zeri, 1953.
5 For Virgilio Spada see Ehrle; Blunt, 1979, pp. 205-207.
6 Though he was made architect of the Sapienza in 1632.
1 See Relatione del Convent0 di S. Carlo allé 4 Fontane di Roma, 1610-1650, published by Pollak, 1927, I, pp. 36-51. 2 Wittkower, 1958, pp. izi ff.
3 That is, of comparable importance to those discussed. There were, of course, other churches belonging to the Orders with frescoes by leading seventeenth-century artists. The most significant was the Barnabite S. Carlo ai Catinari in which Domenichino painted complex allegories of the Cardinal Virtues on the pendentives of the dome (itself painted by a pupil of Guido Reni) for Cardinal Borghese soon after those of S. Andrea della Valle.