# 03 CHP-3 sec iv

Thus by the time that Urban VIII died in 1644 only the Theatine church of S. Andrea della Valle contained any considerable painting by the Baroque artists with whom the religious Orders have often been closely associated.3 The Gesti, S. Ignazio, the Chiesa
Nuova all remained largely undecorated and the spectacular enrichment forwhich they are famous today was carried out only in the second half of the century. The
Capuchins alone had been the unwilling recipients of Barberini patronage.
It was the Oratorians who took the next step, although in grandeur of conception, in artistic importance and in devotional innovation they were later to be far outclassed by their Jesuit rivals. Ever since Pietro da Cortona had painted his small fresco on the ceiling of the sacristy the fathers of the Chiesa Nuova had been trying to commission further works from him. But the artist’s engagements with such powerful patrons as the Sacchetti, the Barberini and the Grand Duke of Tuscany made it impossible for him to undertake anything else. Now, however, thirteen years later, the situation was quite different: the Barberini were in exile, and Pietro, who had already been working for some years on the decoration of the Palazzo Pitti, was seeking every opportunity to leave Florence. So when in the summer of 1646 the Oratorians renewed their appeal and at the same time asked the Grand Duke to grant Pietro temporary leave of absence, they were in a much stronger position. And after some delays and many promises to continue working for the Medici, Pietro began painting cartoons for the cupola of the

[Page 77]
Chiesa Nuova in November 1646. Though he had had to convince the Grand Duke that his absence from Florence was to be a short one, the frescoes were not ready till May
1651, and even then he had not completed the four pendentives.1 Yet the work had not been particularly complicated for the basic problems it posed had all been solved by
Lanfranco a quarter of a century earlier, and in his fine Adoration of the Trinity and Glorification of the Instruments of the Passion Pietro did little more than produce an elegant variation of the cupola of S. Andrea della Valle. Now once more an all-powerful Pope temporarily put an end to the Oratorians’ plans for completing the enrichment of their church. Innocent X after some hesitation turned to Pietro da Cortona to fresco the vault of his family’s palace in the Piazza Navona, and not till he had completed this at the end of 1654 was he able to resume work on the Oratorian church. He then painted on the pendentives of the cupola the four prophets who had foretold the coming of the Virgin and the Redeemer—Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Daniel; and in the apse The Assumption of the Virgin, acclaimed by a number of saints, among whom the most prominent was St. Philip Neri. He began work rapidly, but once again there were long delays owing to the intervention of the Pope, by now Alexander VII. In fact, the whole history of Pietro’s relationship with the Oratorians shows how subordinate it was to his commitments with more highly placed patrons. Not until 1664 did he undertake his last and most important commission for the church—the vault of the nave. In this he was required to depict a miraculous intervention of the Virgin Mary which had occurred during the construction of the Chiesa Nuova. In recording the event the artist completely abandoned the illusionistic devices which he had used to such great effect on the ceiling of the Palazzo Barberini thirty years earlier. The scene is wholly removed from the spectator in an elaborate frame surrounded by richly gilded coffers, and its selfcontained nature is emphasised by the fact that the fresco represents—though on different planes—both the real world of St Philip Neri and workmen and the supernatural world of the Virgin and angels. The worshipper in the church is not required to participate in the drama being enacted above him.
In fact, all Pietro’s frescoes for the Oratorians, though sumptuous and finely executed, show a certain lack of imagination. He was a man, as is shown by his work in the Barberini, Pitti and Pamfili palaces, who found greater inspiration in the triumphs of this world than in those of the next. Mysticism did not come easily to him, and the passionate nature of St Philip which had meant so much to earlier artists and writers filled'him with goodwill but never lifted him to the heights. None the less, when he had completed his commissions in the Chiesa Nuova, the Oratorians could claim to own the most completely decorated church of any Order in Rome. The whole scheme was eventually concluded in about 1700 when a number of leading artists chosen by the Oratorian scholar and collector Padre Sebastiano Resta painted fifteen oval scenes from the
Old and New Testaments which were placed above the arches of the nave and transepts.2
Some years after Pietro da Cortona had resumed work in the Chiesa Nuova,

[Page 78]
further decorations were undertaken in S. Andrea della Valle. In about 1650 Pope
Innocent X’s all-powerful sister-in-law, Donna Olimpia, persuaded the Theatines to commission Mattia Preti to paint the apse of their church. The artist divided the wall into three large compartments and depicted scenes from the saint’s martyrdom. But by now the frescoes of Domenichino (whom Preti tried to imitate) and Lanfranco of a generation earlier had come to be looked upon as classics, and this combined with the chauvinism of Roman painters led to the denigration of Preti’s style and his enforced and embittered departure from Rome.1
In 1665 when Pietro da Cortona completed the great scheme which he had begun in the Chiesa Nuova thirty years earlier, the Gesù still looked essentially the same as it had done in 1589, the year of Cardinal Farnese’s death. Tapestries specially hung out on ceremonial occasions might temporarily conceal the bleakness, but it was all too obvious that the church had had no share in the great decorative schemes that were so striking elsewhere in Rome. This was not due to want of trying. The Cardinal had reserved the decoration of the tribune and the High Altar for himself and his family, and though he had conceived grandiose plans for it, the work had scarcely been begun at the time of his death. His heirs had proved wholly recalcitrant. Alessandro, the great captain, spent all his life in the north, and lais son and grandson had no particular sympathy for the
Jesuits.
In 1661, however, a new General, Gian Paolo Oliva, was elected, and under his rule everything was changed.2 A cultivated man and a great lover of the arts, he showed the stubborn patience and diplomatic finesse required when dealing with difficult patrons. He also had at hand a most unusual and fortunate opportunity. In 1657 a French painter, Jacques Courtois, had entered the Society. Courtois—or Giacomo Borgognone as the Italians called him—had come to Italy from Dijon when still only 15,3 and had been taken up by Guido Reni and later made friends with Michelangelo Cerquozzi and
Pis tro da Cortona. He had seen army life and he soon made a name for himself as a painter of battle scenes. In about 1654 his wife died after some years of stormy married life and there were rumours that he had murdered her. Shortly afterwards he decided to become a Jesuit and approached the rector of the Society’s college in Siena. He was sent with letters of introduction to the General in Rome, and was there required to prove his good faith by making strange use of his undoubted skill. ‘Finally my confessor gave me a small portrait of a woman on copper and told me to change it into something
, -spiritual. I turned it into Our Saviour... . .’ He then took the final vows and spent the rest of his life in the novitiate of S. Andrea and the Casa Professa. The General of the
Jesuits at this time was the Belgian Goswin Nickel, but the outstanding personality was already the Vicar, Oliva, and there can be little doubt that it was he who took advantage of the new situation. Borgognone had entered the Society without brushes intending to give up art for ever. Within a year he was painting in the Casa Professa a series of

[Page 79]
lunettes and frescoes glorifying the Virgin as well as a number of scenes depicting famous Christian battles. He was also encouraged to go on painting for private patrons and hand over his earnings to the Society. He and his brother Guglielmo painted much for Oliva, but his great masterpiece was to be the decoration of the tribune, upon which the new General had set his heart. To achieve this, however, the permission and financial support of the leading member of the Farnese family, Duke Ranuccio of Parma, were essential, and in 1671 the Jesuits opened negotiations with him.1 But the Duke was a vacillating man who found it quite impossible to make up his mind. To persuade him of the importance of the decoration that they required the Jesuits sent him their plans for the rest of the church with only the tribune left bare. This, surely, would provoke him into action.
The sketches, however, were not a success. The Duchess did not like them and said that she had in mind an artist of her own ‘molto stimato et accreditato’ whom she wished to paint the vault. The Duke remained cautious. He reluctantly agreed to spend
30,000 scudi on the tribune, but he was thoroughly confused by the Jesuit plans and soon began to think of reasons for delaying them. If the dome was to be painted, he declared, the ribs would have to be removed and this would not be safe. Admittedly he had no authority over this part of the decoration, but he managed to imply that the
Jesuits were wrecking the church and lacking in respect to the memory of his ancestor
Cardinal Alessandro. He was always professing his anxiety to have the tribune decorated, but whenever pressed he would say coldly that he was ‘not ready to do so at present and that this was not the time to begin’. In vain did Oliva insist on the claims of Borgognone—‘our brother who is so excellent in things of this kind’—and encourage the artist to make drawings of Joshua stopping the Sun.2 Months and years passed and still nothing happened. In despair the Jesuits proposed moving the remains of St Ignatius from the High Altar to the chapel in the left transept. If the Duke would not agree to the decoration of the tribune, they argued, would he not at least release them from their obligations to him and his family? But by now it was too late. In 1676, with the preliminary sketches made but with no opportunity to achieve his masterpiece, Borgognone died.
This brought the affair to a standstill. It was not merely that the Duke who had been difficult enough about the expense of 30,000 scudi would surely be far more so when he also had to pay the painter. It was that the Jesuits had genuinely wanted
Borgognone to decorate the central feature of their greatest church. He was, they felt, the one artist capable of carrying out the vast work they had in mind. There was, besides, the undoubted satisfaction that it was a Jesuit who was to undertake this great glorification of the Triumph of the Order of Jesus. The insistence of Oliva and his emissaries that Borgognone should be employed occurs throughout their letters— indeed it marks the first step in a definite Jesuit policy towards the arts since the scenes of martyrdom which they had had painted at the end of the sixteenth century.

[Page 80]
During the course of his futile negotiations with the Duke of Parma, Oliva had been looking around for another artist to paint those parts of the church over which the
Jesuits had complete authority. He had originally considered three painters, Carlo
Maratta, Ciro Ferri and Giacinto Brandi, whose diversity of styles shows that he had no preconceived ideas on the matter.1 Then he saw some frescoes by the young Giovanni
Battista Gaulli in the church of S. Marta and immediately included him in his list of possible painters. Bernini, who had already employed Gaulli on some decorative work of his own, was enthusiastic, and the artist had one further claim of overriding importance. Like Oliva he came from Genoa. In August 1672 a contract was signed between the two men.
Gaulli—or ‘Baciccio’—had been born in 1639 and had already made a name for himself as a brilliant portrait painter. But his only important decorative work had caused him some.trouble. The Jesuit confessor of his patron Prince Pamfili had decided that the nudity of his figures on the pendentives of S. Agnese in Piazza Navona were
‘lascivious’ and they had had to be hurriedly clothed.2 It was a strange beginning for one who was now to be entrusted by the Jesuits with the most elaborate commission in
Rome. For Gaulli agreed to paint the entire dome (including the lantern and the pendentives which had already been frescoed by Giovanni de’ Vecchi); the entire vault including the window recesses; and the vaults of the transepts above the chapels of St
Ignatius and St Francis Xavier. He was to omit only the vault of the tribune which was being kept for Borgognone. All this enormous area was to be painted and gilded by the artist at his own expense. The dome was to be completed within two years, and all the rest of the work—gilding, painting and stucco—within eight years from then, i.e. by the end of 1682. If the work was considered by experts to be other than perfect Gaulli undertook to correct it without charge. If all went well he was to be paid 14,000 scudi as well as all the expenses of scaffolding and so on.3
As the work progressed Oliva’s ambitions grew. The dome was ready by April
1675,4 and four years later the vault was completed. The experts who were invited to a private showing were not enthusiastic,5 but with the general public it won ‘universal admiration both for the beauty of the painting and for the arrangement of the stucco which makes it still more worthy of applause’. When trying to resume negotiations with the Duke of Parma for the decoration of the tribune, Oliva naturally spoke of
Gaulli’s work with the most fervid admiration and pressed home the moral6: ‘We have at last,’ he wrote in September 1679, ‘through the grace of God, removed the scaffolding

[Page 81]
from this church of the Gesù, founded by Your Highness’s ancestors for the Society and renowned among the miracles of Rome... . Already the parts which remain to be painted and gilded are being prepared, and all that remains is the head of this famous temple, which by special rights belongs to the house of the founder. The very crown of the work depends on the tribune. But, without the special command and generosity of Your Highness, the scaffolding cannot go up nor can the work be completed.’ He scarcely dared, he added, suggest that Gaulli be given this further task, although that painter had ‘surpassed himself in the work and is considered to be as good as the very best artists’. Ranuccio’s reaction was entirely characteristic. He agreed to the employment of Gaulli and offered to pay 3000 scudi—exactly one-tenth of what had been asked for. So the tribune and High Altar remained bare and Gaulli merely painted a small fraction of the vault above it and the conch of the apse. Finally in 1685 he completed his work in the church by painting the left transept above the altar of St Ignatius; for, as will be seen on a later page, the chapel of St Francis Xavier was decorated by another artist after giving rise to further difficulties.
The respective parts played by Oliva, Bernini and Gaulli in the frescoes of the
Gesù are not known. No programme has come to light, and it is probable that the relations between the three men were so close that more was arranged by the spoken than by the written word. Certainly Bernini’s part in the undertaking was stressed from the very first and has been accepted by historians ever since.1 The share of Oliva can be inferred from a certain complexity in the iconography.
During the 1670s, when the frescoes were being devised and executed, the Roman
Church was shaken by the most serious controversy that had faced it since the Council of Trent.2 Crucially implicated, at the very centre of the whirlwind, was the Society of
Jesus and, in particular, its General, Oliva. The trouble had started soon after the arrival in 1664 of a Spanish priest, Miguel de Molinos, who rapidly acquired a wide and exceedingly influential following by preaching two especially appealing doctrines: that communion could be administered daily to the faithful if they required it and that far more stress should be placed on passive contemplation than active meditation. Both of these views—and particularly the latter—were directly opposed to those of the Jesuits, who soon reacted strongly with all the intellectual and political weapons , at their command. It is always difficult for the opponents in any serious controversy to distinguish between real questions of principle and more petty motives of jealousy. Certainly the Jesuits; quite apart from the doctrinal issues which divided them from Molinos, cannot have viewed with any enthusiasm his growing prestige in those very spheres
- 1 Thus an avviso of 1675 (Roma, XVIII, 1940, p. 23 8) reported the occasion as follows: ‘hanno li
P. P. Giesuiti scoperto la cuppola della loro Chiesa . .. dipinta da nuovo con disegno del Cavalier Bernini, a fattura d’un tale Baccici Fiorentino [sic], e da molti virtuosi non viene troppo lodata l’invenzione del primo, come anche il lavoro del secondo’. For a modem examination of the problem see Enggass, 1957, pp. 303-5.

[Page 82]
which had hitherto been subject almost exclusively to their own influences—the aristocratic society of Rome and the papal court itself. This, no doubt, played its part in the violence of their reaction and made them more determined than ever to assert their irresistible power as ostentatiously as possible. Some such consideration must have weighed in Oliva's mind as he took time off from the problem of Molinos to consider the decoration of the Gesù.
Yet, as often happens in complex disputes, the issues were not wholly clear-cut.
Both sides were arguing within the same climate of ideas, and in many cases the discussion concerned nuances rather than easily explicable doctrines. A thème especially dear to Molinos—and one, of course, by no means new—was that of the Blood of Christ in which the soul could purify itself of guilt and sin. ‘It is certain’, he wrote in his Guida
Spirituale,1 ‘that before the soul is ready to enter into the presence of the divinity and unite with it, it must wash itself with the precious Blood of the Redeemer and adorn itself with the richness of His Passion.’ Among those deeply affected by this same concept—though it is impossible to say whether or not he derived the notion from Molinos
—wafs Bernini. ‘He would sometimes think very deeply and also talk about a matter of the highest consequence—the belief that he always had in the powers of the Blood of
Christ in which, he used to say, he hoped to drown his sins.’2 And in about 1668 he employed an etcher to reproduce one of his drawings in which the blood streams down from the wounds of the crucified Christ into an eternal, boundless ocean.
It was presumably Bernini who first suggested to Gaulli that he should adapt this theme to the dome of the Gesù. A number of the painter’s drawings, almost certainly connected with the project, survive—but were never made use of.3 Perhaps the theme, innocuous when Bernini had first drawn it a few years earlier, had by now become too closely associated with Molinos to be palatable to the Jesuits. Certainly they themselves always avoided the mystical, and the etching taken from Bernini is unquestionably tinged with feelings of passivity and quietism. More likely they realised that, whatever its significance for private devotion, it was wholly unsuitable for the decoration of a dome. In any case, Gaulli’s scheme, when finally brought to fruition, was based on a different subject, although it retained links with the Blood of Christ and although it too had been treated by Bernini. This was the Duplex Intercessio in which the kneeling
Virgin, trampling on a serpent and pointing to Her breast, and Christ, indicating His
Cross which is being carried by angels, together appeal to God for mercy for suffering humanity. Below the Cross Adam and Eve join in the supplication, and around this principal scene are groups of saints and kings in adoration.4 '

[Page 83]
It was usual in Roman churches to fill the triangular spaces below the dome with figures of the Doctors of the Church, the Prophets or the Evangelists. Oliva decided that he would include all three and add to them a group which had not hitherto been represented, the Judges. With miraculous ease the artist solved the problems posed by presenting four figures in a single pendentive and made them sweeping enough to fit in with his grandiose patterns, yet sufficiently individualised to be easily recognisable and never monotonous.
It is, however, Gaulli’s fresco in the nave which is the most striking feature of the
Gesù, although it was originally to be no more than a prelude to the climax of the tribune (Plate 14). Here the Jesuits were able for the first time to display on a large scale what had for some years been an essential feature of all their visual propaganda through the medium of book illustrations and the like1 : the theme that theirs was essentially a missionary society concerned more with the winning of this world for Catholicism than with the fate of souls in the next. With the dangerous heresies of Molinos daily gaining ground, the theme was one of ever greater urgency and, as the vault was much more accessible to the general public than the dome, the symbolism with which the message was conveyed could be expressed in much more simple terms. To represent the theme Gaulli ignored the classicising tendencies of his immediate predecessors and returned for inspiration to Pietro da Cortona’s daring and revolutionary ceiling in the
Barberini palace of forty years earlier. Everything radiates from the golden circle of light which emerges from the Society’s emblem IHS at the far end of the vault. The rays plunge out through the circle of cherubs and throw into dazzling relief the ranks of the saints and the blest, the Three Kings who first worshipped the Name of Jesus, the prominent figure of the Church and the House of Farnese holding aloft a model of the Gesù.2 From these it re-emerges with renewed and searing intensity to strike the damned and the heretics, who are blinded by it and hurtled past the frame of the painting on to the stucco decoration of the vault and, by implication, into the body of the church. The colours are warm and brilliant, and an effect of cosmic drama is established by the contrast between the blues and reds and browns of the figures and the golden glare from the Name of Jesus, Whose triumph the fresco celebrates. To attract the eye of the worshipper to this tremendous spectacle Gaulli devised sixteen figures, which were executed by his followers in stucco and placed in the window niches along the nave, whence they gaze upward in awe. They serve not only to bring into close emotionaTcontact the two realms of matter and spirit but also to emphasise once again the overwhelming power of the Jesuit missionaries, for they represent all those regions— from Ethiopia to Peru, from China to Mexico—where the disciples of St Ignatius had made their presence felt.

[Page 84]
In the apse, which was completed only after the death of Oliva, Gaulli was required to return to the more abstruse levels of theology which had characterised his frescoes in the dome. He revived the subject of The Adoration of the Lamb which had been hardly seen in Rome since the mosaics in S. Prassede and S. Maria Maggiore many hundred years earlier. The choice of such an archaic theme may have represented a concession to the original intentions of the church’s founder, Alessandro Farnese, for that Cardinal, whose patronage was often marked by strange, mediaeval echoes, had once had the intention of decorating the tribune with mosaics. But there is another possible reason for the choice. In a less mystical and more attractive form it incorporated much of the idea which had originally been proposed for the dome—the glorification of Christ’s suffering—and at the same time fitted in more easily with the triumphant tone of the rest of the church.1 Much of the traditional iconography was used. The Book on the throne is sealed with seven seals, and before it burn seven torches. Twenty-four ancients adore the Lamb; behind are youths with palms and angels trumpeting and lifting up their thuribles to fill them with prayers. The theme appears frequently in Oliva’s writings; but, despite all the brilliance ofGaulli’s handling, the transference into Baroque terms of imagery, wliich had been so effective in formalised mosaic, has not proved wholly satisfactory.
Gaulli’s achievement had exceeded all Jesuit expectations and he had been generously rewarded by Oliva who showed great patience in dealing with his fits of temperament and angry outbursts.2 But the contract between them could not be completed, for though the Jesuit missionaries might assert their authority to the ends of the earth, the Society was still not master in its own house. Even at this stage the pressures that had bedevilled Jesuit intentions ever since their early impoverished dealings with
Cardinal Farnese could prove irresistible.
The chapel, in the right transept was one of the only ones that long remained exclusively under Jesuit patronage. It had originally been dedicated to the Saviour and then to the Resurrection; for it Baglione had painted an altarpiece in 1602.3 On his canonisation in 1623 the chapel was dedicated to St Francis Xavier and in it was placed a picture of the saint which had been painted by Van Dyck. Towards the end of the
1660s, however, the patronage of the chapel was acquired by Monsignor Negroni, an exceedingly rich and powerful prelate ‘tutto spirito e fuoco’ who was later made Cardinal.4 From the first, Negroni showed that he considered himself the final arbiter in his own chapel and that he intended to ignore Oliva’s plans for the rest of the church. He commissioned drawings for a grandiose altar from Pietro da Cortona just before the artist’s death in 1669, and so high was the projected pediment that the cornice had to be broken. After Pietro’s death rival architects were soon writing to Duke Ranuccio at Parma that this was ruining the architecture designed by his great ancestor. But
Negroni showed that he had powerful friends, for he caused the arms of Popes Clement

[Page 85]
THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS 85
IX and Innocent XI to be carved on the front os the altar and then wrote to Oliva to make sure that the impheations of this gesture should be fully understood: ‘As I told
Your Reverence, I have ordered the stone masons to set to work on a record to the eternal memory of these two Popes whom I venerate.’
But this was only a beginning. Though in later years he was to sit to Gaulli for his portrait, Negroni did not wish to have his chapel painted by the artist and he chose instead another Genoese painter, Gianandrea Carlone,1 and the most famous artist of the day, Carlo Maratta.2 Very reluctantly and under extreme pressure Oliva was compelled to agree to the change, and from the bitter controversy that followed we can see what rights a patron claimed to exert over the decoration of his chapel.3
‘Worship of the Holy Relic’,4 wrote Negroni, ‘will be open to the public; the rights of the chapel will belong to him who has dedicated it; and its upkeep will be the responsibility of the Jesuit fathers.’ Neither the tone nor the substance were conciliatory and the Jesuits were infuriated by Negroni’s claims. But the Cardinal remained stubborn.
He only wanted the authority that all patrons naturally possessed ‘as regards the essential arrangement of the chapel—for instance, neither the picture, nor the capitals, nor the columns were to be altered without his full agreement’. But this was to be the last clash in the long series between the Society and its benefactors.
Many years earlier another great monument to the power of the Jesuits had appeared in Rome. In the rebuilding of their novitiate church, S. Andrea al Quirinale, they were faced not with the tyranny, hesitation or meanness of a rich patron, but with the absolute supremacy of the most gifted and successful architect since Michelangelo.
Fortunately he was a man who profoundly shared their ideals and he was given a free hand by the Society.
Bernini’s relations with the Jesuits remained very close throughout his Efe. As a young sculptor one of his first tasks had been to help his father on the monument to
Cardinal Bellarmine in the Gesù, and, soon after, he had collaborated with the Jesuits in the production of a superbly illustrated edition of Urban VIII’s Latin poems. Since then he had maintained the firmest contacts with the Society. Domenico, his son, claimed that for forty years he went regularly once a week to the Gesù.
When in 1661 Oliva became General, this connection was still further strengthened by the great friendship between the two men. Bernini frequently gave Oliva advice, which was always accepted, on matters of artistic policy, and he also produced a number of illustrations for an edition ofhis sermons. Oliva made use of the artist to forward his diplomatic ends.6

[Page 86]
Bernini’s relationship with the Society was not confined to friendship with its members and work for its establishments. In France he often visited Jesuit churches, and talked much of his sympathy with Jesuit ideas. Oliva said that he could discuss matters of spiritual importance with the deepest understanding,1 and all modern historians have commented on the fact that much of his best work seems to fulfil the ideals of the Society. In the novitiate church of S. Andrea which he began to build in
1658 he had his greatest opportunity of doing so. He was well pleased with his achievement, for when many years later he was discovered by his own son in a corner of the church, he said to him: ‘My son, this is the only piece of my architecture for which I feel special satisfaction in the depth of my heart, and often when I need rest from my troubles I come here to gain consolation from my work.’2
This was at a time when the building was already considered one of the finest in
Rome, but as usual there had been many complications before the project could actually be carried out. As the Jesuits had increased in power and numbers, the restricted size of their patched-up novitiate on the Quirinal had become more and more unsatisfactory, until by 1642 they claimed that darkness and humidity made it almost unusable.3 Two serious difficulties stood in the way of any rebuilding or expansion. The first was the refusal of Cardinal Bandino to sell any of his land which surrounded the novitiate, and the second was the strong objection of the Pope to anything which would obstruct the view from his palace.4 Tliis had stopped Cardinal Ludovisi founding S. Ignazio on this site as he had wished, and even after the Bandino property had been acquired, the papal interdiction was strictly enforced. In 1649 Cardinal Ceva agreed to build a new church and lodgings, and he chose for the purpose Borromini, the most prominent architect of the day since the temporary eclipse of Bernini.5 The drawings were made, but Innocent
X forbade their being executed. Seven years later, however, the Rector of the novitiate appealed once again to the new Pope, Alexander VII, whose close friend he was. This time he was successful, and after the Pope had satisfied himself that his view would not be disturbed, he strongly encouraged all his entourage to contribute towards the expense.
By far the largest sum was given by Prince Camillo Pamfili, nephew of Pope Innocent
X, who assumed the patronage for himself and his family. Like all patrons he declared at the outset his intention that the church should ‘rival the most magnificent buildings in Rome erected through his munificence’.6 But unlike many of them (and most unlike his usual self)7 he carried out these intentions fully until his death in 1665, after which his example was loyally followed by his son. We hear less of financial troubles in
S. Andrea than in any of the other churches that have hitherto been considered, and the

[Page 87]
spirit of the enterprise, as regards both finance and the authority of the artist, can best be gauged from an episode in 1663 when Prince Pamfdi went to visit the work in progress.
Finding that the expense was going to be much higher than anticipated, he left 1000 scudi on the spot and said: ‘You must do whatever Cavalier Bernini orders, even if all my substance should go in the process... . 1
In fact Bernini’s authority was felt at every stage of the building. Each bill, each contract was scrutinised by him and endorsed with his vigorous initials.2 Workmen engaged on the most menial tasks came under his direct supervision. He was himself the virtual patron of the whole enterprise and refused all payment, including even battle pictures by Giacomo Borgognone.3 Nor can his assistant Mattia de’ Rossi have put much of a strain on Jesuit resources, as he was paid only in wine, the inevitable battle pictures and two old majolica plates, which we have never succeeded in selling, painted, it is thought, by Raphael of Urbino or at least someone of that school. At one time they were valued at 50 scudi, but this was probably too high an estimate’.4
This marvellous church, with its richly coloured marbles and sumptuous decoration entirely subordinated to an immediately striking and simple oval plan, was thus a pure expression of Bernini’s genius, unfettered by the instructions of patrons or shortages of money (Plate 16). Yet by comparing it to his other works we can see that its Jesuit destination provided a very special impulse. Nowhere else is the iconography planned so coherently with every element of the decoration symbolising in some degree the dominating figure of St Andrew who rises triumphantly from the broken pediment above the main chapel. And, as later in the Gesù and S. Ignazio, the emotional pressure is such that normal architectural barriers are broken down to link Heaven and Earth in a single unity. Daylight streams in from the lantern above the High Altar and is symbolically identified with the glory of golden rays which radiates from the drum; while spilling down into the chapel is a mass of golden putti—at first only heads and wings and then, as they come nearer the ground, more and more solid. When the sun lights up the gold and white coffers of the dome the effect of divine intervention is far more poignantly communicated than in any fresco.
As soon as the main structure of the church was complete, the Jesuits began to consider the problem of altar paintings. Although Bernini’s advice must have been taken, the actual arrangements with artists were made directly by the Jesuits, though
-they were paid for by the heirs of Prince Pamfili who had died in 1667.5 Guglielmo
Borgognone who was commissioned in 1668 to paint The Martyrdom of St. Andrew for the High Altar had already been employed in the novitiate with his Jesuit brother
s ibid., Fondo di Gesù—N. 865-13: Thus Gaulli was paid 100 saldi ‘per le mani del P. Francesco
Scaramuccia quale disse pagarli di denari propri di detto Noviziato con animo di rivalersene dal Signor
Principe Panfiglio . . .’

[Page 88]
Giacomo. Gaulli was an equally obvious choice. In 1676 he painted the Death of St
Francis Xavier for the altar dedicated to that saint and was paid 100 scudi. He also painted two more scenes from thelife of the saintfor the same chapel after aseries of complicated financial disputes.1 Negotiations with another artist, Giacinto Brandi, to decorate the
Chapel of the Passion with pictures of the Pietà, Christ and St Veronica and The Flagellation were prolonged and difficult,2 and Carlo Maratta, the best known (and best paid) artist in Rome, took eight years to deliver his altarpiece of St Stanislas Kostka.3
The last chapel to be adorned was that dedicated to the Madonna. In 1691, twentyone years after the church had been opened to the public, a Jesuit document complained that it was ‘affatto rustica’.4 It was then taken over by Cardinal Ottoboni, nephew of
Pope Alexander VIII, who commissioned altarpieces from Ludovico David of the
Nativity, the Adoration of the Magi and the Flight into Egypt and paid for them from the funds left by Prince Pamfili. The latter’s heirs reserved the right, which they later assumed, to change the decoration when they decided to embellish the chapel.
With the decoration of the Gesù and S. Andrea al Quirinale either completeor under way only one large problem now faced the Jesuits. S. Ignazio, though open to the public since 1642, still looked a vast white mausoleum, wholly unenticing amid the coloured marvels of other churches. When in 1680 General Oliva summoned to Rome the 38year-old Andrea Pozzo to remedy this state of affairs his ambitions must at last have seemed fulfilled. For here was an artist of real talent who was himself a Jesuit—a new
Borgognone, in fact. Pozzo, who was born in Trent, had entered the Society as a laybrother at the age of 22, and had enjoyed an enormous success in North Italy, where he had decorated several Jesuit churches, notably at Turin and Mondovi, with spectacular effects of perspective.6 Some of his paintings had reached Oliva who had shown them to Carlo Maratta. On his advice Pozzo was ordered to Rome. When he arrived after an unhurried journey, Oliva was dead.
The story of what followed was admirably suited to his romantically minded eighteenth-century biographers, and they revelled in telling how the artist with the utmost humility accepted the ordinary lay duties he was given by Inis superiors, unaware of his talent; how he went through Rome, collecting alms; how one day these superiors were discussing the spectacle they were to put on for the Forty Hours, and saying that economies would be necessary in the stage-sets; how Pozzo volunteered to construct the theatrical apparatus out of rags and used canvas—an offer that was rejected
'with scorn; how finally it was accepted and the result was a triumph. It is a success story familiar through countless fairy tales. But Pozzo, despite the recognition of his talents, was still faced with many difficulties.

[Page 89]
He was first required to paint the corridor linking the little rooms where St Ignatius had lived.1 These had been preserved when the Casa Professa was built adjoining the
Gesù in 1602, and converted into chapels. The task of decorating this corridor had been begun by Giacomo Borgognone, and left incomplete at his death. Because of its shape it could not be treated as a single unit, and the artist therefore divided the walls and vault into small scenes, separated by elaborate frames and putti. In them he depicted various aspects of St Ignatius’s sojourn in this world and the next, and made such excessive use of his great technical virtuosity that, looked at from the wrong viewpoint, the decoration appears grotesquely distorted.
Just when Pozzo was beginning to be appreciated by the Jesuits, an incident occurred which almost made them lose him. The Duke of Savoy, in whose service the artist had previously worked and who had reluctantly given him permission to obey Oliva’s summons to Rome, now called him back to decorate a gallery. Pozzo asked the new
General to refuse him permission, but was told that it was his ‘duty to satisfy great princes in their lawful demands’. He then appealed secretly to the Pope, above the head of the General, and by him was authorised to turn down the Duke’s request. This prince, thinking that it was the Jesuits who had refused permission, wrote another personal letter, and when told by Pozzo of the Pope’s intervention, appealed to him also.
But the Pope confirmed his instructions to Pozzo, and the Duke was therefore reduced to making life as disagreeable as possible for the Jesuits in his dominions, who, in turn, blamed Pozzo for their difficulties.
The church of S. Ignazio had never been completed owing to financial difficulties and disputes with the Ludovisi descendants. The Rector of the Collegio Romano now determined that if he could not have a real dome, at least he would have something which would fill the awkward gap where the dome had been planned. Various artists and architects were consulted and among those who submitted plans was Pozzo, who proposed to paint in perspective a flat piece of canvas to give the illusion of a dome. On the advice of Mattia de’ Rossi, Bernini’s successor in S. Andrea al Quirinale and now architect of St. Peter’s, his plans were accepted. Though he met with the derision of his fellow-Jesuits, Pozzo claimed that he was as sure of the result as of a proposition of
Euclid,2 and his optimism was at first justified. When shown to the public in June 1685 his device was described as ‘very beautiful and ingenious, and it is thought that it will be many years before they decide to build a real dome’.3 A later writer was quick to point out that being on canvas the dome was bound to darken,4 and in fact within a few years of being painted it was all but invisible.
For some years after 1685 Pozzo painted frescoes in the tribune and the apse, representing there some of the principal events in the early history of the Society, culminating in Christ’s amply fulfilled promise to St Ignatius at La Storta: ‘Ego vobis
Romae propitius ero.’ Both in subject-matter and in treatment these differ greatly from

[Page 90]
Gaulli’s frescoes in the Gesù: they lack both the theological complexity and the emotional power of the earlier work. In some ways they mark a reaction against the
Baroque. Every figure is displayed to the full and the whole composition is given rigidity by a bold architectural framework. That a work so immeasurably different in feeling and style from The Adoration os the Lamb was accepted and welcomed by the
Jesuits shows either that their taste had changed out of all recognition in the last few
, years, or that this taste was sufficiently catholic to include anything grandiose without too much concern for its style. On the pendentives Pozzo wished to avoid the subjects usual for this position—the Evangelists and the Doctors of the Church—and to choose something different.1 And so he painted Judith with the head of Holofernes, David with the head of Goliath, Jael hammering a nail into Sisera, and Samson killing a thousand with a jawbone. Though designed to illustrate the zeal with which heresy must always be thwarted, the Roman populace was less reverent, and the word went around that:
‘anyone who wants to buy good meat should go to S. Ignazio, as four new butchers have just opened there!’
Tt was’, wrote the artist’s biographer ‘because of the extraordinary reputation acquired through this painting [the dome], not only by Padre Andrea, the artist, but also by the Society, which commissioned it, that the idea was born of painting the entire vault of the same church of S. Ignazio, the greatest task that could be performed by an artist; and although the reverend fathers were agreed to employ Padre Pozzo, yet they moved with considerable caution before undertaking it, so as to consult the famous painters and architects of Rome.’2 The vault had previously been decorated with stucco work, which the artist ruthlessly destroyed, saying that it was ‘more suitable for a kitchen than for a church’. For this step, inevitable, of course, if he was to paint the vault, he was so bitterly attacked that the Jesuits were frightened of going about for fear of receiving some public affront. They considered, therefore, abandoning the work and leaving the vault as it was. But by now it was too late, and in 1688 Pozzo began his colossal undertaking (Plate 15).
In later years the artist himself explained the meaning of his fresco at great length.3
Essentially it was based on the words of Christ as reported by St Luke: T am come to send fire on the earth: but what will I, if it be already kindled?’ Adapting this reference from the Church to St Ignatius himself—had not the saint often encouraged his disciples with the words ‘Go and set everything aflame’?—Pozzo turned the whole ceiling into
"avast celebration of the Jesuit missionaries. ‘... In the middle of thevault I have painted the figure of Jesus, who sends forth a ray of fight to the heart of Ignatius, which is then transmitted by him to the most distant hearts of the four parts of the world... . . From the breast of the Redeemer there emerges another ray which strikes a shield, on which is painted the Name of Jesus, the crown of light. And this means that the Redeemer, having as his purpose the glory of His name, wishes to honour Ignatius... . .’

[Page 91]
This short extract from Pozzo’s description makes it clear that he too was following one of the constant features of Jesuit decoration—the impact made on this world by the forces of the next instead of the more usual scheme in which the saints are shown receiving their rewards and rising to eternal bliss.
All this lavish decoration turned the three principal Jesuit churches into the most spectacular in Rome, as they were the first to point out.1 But even after they had been completed, the very energy that had been employed seemed to encourage further efforts, and in the last few years of the century many new works were undertaken. Among them was the most elaborate chapel ever conceived, dedicated to the founder of the movement which had so signally triumphed.
The chapel in the left transept of the Gesù belonged to the heirs of Cardinal Savelli.2
Dedicated originally to the Crucifixion, the altar had been designed but never completed by Giacomo della Porta. After the death of the Cardinal, his heirs seem to have taken no interest in the chapel for over a century, and it thus reverted unofficially into the hands of the Jesuits. When Ignatius was canonised in 1622, they moved his remains to this chapel, and above them placed the picture painted for the occasion by Van Dyck.
Fifteen years later, the Jesuits were offered a superb urn, modelled by Algardi, in which to place the saint’s bones, and at the same time Pietro da Cortona built a new altar to
' replace della Porta’s uncompleted one, the expense of which was presumably borne by the Jesuits themselves. In 1646, the Eighth General Congregation of the Society agreed that a more ambitious monument should be established. They drew up a memorandum which pointed out that St Dominic in Bologna, St Francis in Assisi and St Benedict in
Montecassino were all suitably commemorated; surely St Ignatius, who alone of all the saintly founders of Orders was buried in Rome, should also have a fine memorial. In view, however, of the Society’s ‘extreme poverty and the disastrous times’, nothing further was done. Four years after this a vast legacy was left to the Jesuits in Peru, who thereupon planned to build a college in Ignatius’ birthplace in the province of Vizcaya.
The General of the Society, Padre Nickel, suggested that the money would be better employed in decorating a chapel in the Gesù in Rome. But the Spaniards evidently did not welcome this idea, and soon began to spread rumours that the General wanted the money ‘for his own private use’. Again, the matter was dropped.
Meanwhile, vast sums began to pour in from all over Europe for the building of the chapel. When Oliva became General, he was determined to have the monument to
Ignatius "hot in the transept but under the High Altar, as the most spectacular feature of the tribune, which was to be lavishly decorated by Giacomo Borgognone. It has been pointed out that the parsimony and delay of the Duke of Parma made this impossible, and Oliva died, disappointed, in 1681. The four-year Generalship of his Belgian successor, Charles de Noy elle, was too short for much to be done, but under the Spaniard,
Tirso Gonzalez, who took over in 1687, the undertaking was again resumed in the transept chapel. But there was yet another problem. The Jesuits were anxious that the

[Page 92]
building of the chapel of St Ignatius should remain entirely in their own hands. The site officially still belonged to the Savelli, and it needed the mediation of the Holy
Roman Emperor to induce Prince Giulio, the head of the family, to give up its patronage in return for special references to the beneficence of his ancestor, the Cardinal.
The Jesuits thus had the money and the rights of patronage with which to build the great altar they planned. But many members of the Society, as well as various architects
, who were consulted, still thought, as Oliva had done, that the tribune was by far the most suitable position. This, however, was impossible as the Duke of Parma flatly refused permission, and so the Jesuits reluctantly resigned themselves to the left transept.
A competition was organised and caused an uproar. Architects and their patrons, aware that this was the finest opportunity in Rome, jockeyed for position, slandered their rivals and intrigued with gusto. The inevitable choice of Pozzo’s plans did nothing to help the situation. Letters, signed and anonymous, poured in on the unfortunate father in charge of the arrangements. The Duke of Parma was told that the church was being wrecked; that in order to economise, white marble was being rubbed with yoke of egg to make it appear yellow; that the whole organisation was a ‘confusion of babel’.
Pozzo threatened to withdraw; there were endless debates as to whether a statue or a picture inspired greater devotion; more architects were consulted. Finally, in May 1695 after much hesitation, the General, Tirso Gonzalez, made his irrevocable decision and forbade any further criticisms. Pozzo was put in complete charge of the altar.
He chose the craftsmen and organised competitions for the sculptors. To avoid still more intrigues all the drawings and models were exhibited in the Galleria Farnese, and the artists invited to be present. They were then asked to vote, in private, for the one they thought the best, excluding their own. The most important piece of sculpture was, naturally, the statue of St Ignatius, and the competition for this was won by the
Frenchman Pierre Legros. While the voting took place crowds waited impatiently in the Casa Professa, and when the decision was announced, French students carried him through the streets in triumph, shouting ‘Viva, viva, Monsu Le Gros.’ The authorities of the French Academy in Rome, where Legros was a student, were less enthusiastic, and after he had also agreed to make a large marble group of Religion triumphing over
Heresy to be placed on one side of the altar, he was dismissed for accepting private commissions in defiance of his status as a pensioner of the King of France.1 He thereupon remained in Rome and became the Jesuits’ principal sculptor. However, as if to show
" - - that they were in no way concerned to promote one particular style, they chose for the group of Faith crushing Idolatry, to be placed on the other side of the altar, the work of another Frenchman, Jean Baptiste Theodon, whose heavily classical lumpiness was a total contrast to Legros’ dramatic, Baroque vigour. Two further large figures showing
Doctors of the Church were also planned, but because it was ‘considered not suitable that [they] should pay court to the Saint’, this scheme was abandoned.
Within the altar itself there is much fineness of craftsmanship and complexity of detail. But these more subtle features—such as the bas-reliefs depicting the life and

[Page 93]
miracles of St Ignatius—are embedded in such a mass of colour and riot of ornamentation that they are easy to overlook. For here at last is that direct Jesuit assault on the emotions that the Protestant traveller from England thought he had experienced nearly a century earlier.
That this policy was now deliberate is shown by other commissions of the time— most notably the gruesome polychrome figure by Legros of St Stanislas Kostka on his deathbed, which was kept in a badly lit room in the novitiate ‘where it powerfully moves those who come to see it’.1 But to sum up Jesuit art in this way, as did nineteenthcentury writers, is wholly inaccurate. All the art of the Baroque had a strongly emotional character, and for much of the seventeenth century the Jesuits were merely trying to follow current styles—often with some difficulty owing to lack of money or patrons.
When in the second half of the century they were at last able to employ artists for themselves, their tendency was to stress the doctrinal elements of their beliefs in rather greater detail than was usual in Roman churches. In fact, the powerfully illusionistic art that they fostered in S. Andrea al Quirinale, the Gesù and above all S. Ignazio long after such decoration had vanished elsewhere was prompted by just such considerations.
The Jesuits, even when spiritually decadent and attacked on all sides for the corruption of their ideals, were above all missionaries. Their art was therefore worldly in a truer sense than is generally meant by that term. They always aimed to display the workings of God’s grace (naturally through the Society of Jesus) on the human soul and they showed correspondingly less interest in the individual salvation of the already blessed.
It was this that gave a logical force to the ceilings of their churches that is lacking in most others. In the Chiesa Nuova we look up and see a private miracle, wholly characteristic of an Order that worshipped the Virgin and St Philip above all else; in the Gesù and S. Ignazio we are witnesses of a universal theme in whose development we ourselves play an essential part.
In 1697 Padre Pozzo designed an altar in the left transept of S. Ignazio which Legros completed with an appealing bas-relief representing The Assumption of the Blessed Luigi Gonzaga. The chapel in the right transept was only completed in 1749 when Filippo della Valle and Pietro Bracci made a marble bas-relief of the Annunciation—see Fabrini.
In 1710 Pierre Legros completed the monument to Pope Gregory XV and Cardinal Ludovisi in the same church. Many documents relating to this project are preserved in the Jesuit Archives: Ecclesia S.
Ignatii de Urbe, 1255.

**Footnotes:**
1 Brigand, 1962, pp. 248-9. ,-
2 I-etter from Resta to Giuseppe Ghezzi, dated 28 January 1695, published in Bottari, III, pp. 490-1.
1 De Dominici, IV, p. 27. For the comments of Cassiano dal Pozzo see Lumbroso, p. 195.
2 There is no full-scale life of Oliva, but references to him are frequent in seventeenth-century literature, and many volumes of his Letters and Sermons were published.
3 Salvagnini.
1 Pecchiai, 1952, p. 109, for these and subsequent negotiations.
2 The subject is the same as that chosen for Carlone in the Jesuit church at Perugia.
1 In fact, as we learn from Pascoli, I, p. 125, Oliva had hoped many years earlier that Pier Francesco Mola, w’ho died in 1666, would undertake the decoration. The account of Oliva’s later plans is also taken from Pascoli. I, p. 200. 2 See avviso quoted in Roma, XVIII, 1940, p. 238.
3 Tacchi-Venturi, 193 5, pp. 147-56. 4 See avviso quoted in Roma, XVIII, 1940, p. 23 8.
5 See avviso of 12 August 1679 published by Pastor, XIV, parte II, p. 26: ‘conclusero tutti che sarebbe bellissima, se fossero pitture meno spropositate et di qualche altra mano’, and further avviso if 6 January 1680. 6 Tacchi-Venturi, 193 5, pp. 154-5-
2 For all this section see the well-documented but very hostile Paul Dudon and also J. de Guibert, as well as the various collections of Oliva’s sermons and the account given in Pastor, XIV, parte II, pp.
325 if-
1 Book I, chapter 16, verse 117. 2 Baldinucci, 1948, p. 135.
3 These drawings are in Berlin and Düsseldorf. This whole interpretation of the iconography of the Gesù frescoes is derived from Lanckoronska, 1935.
4 Panofsky, 1927, p. 290. The presence of Adam and Eve is unusual. The figures were, however, generally included in versions of The Blood of Christ and thus constitute a link between the two programmes. Admittedly Adam and Eve do not appear either in Bernini’s or in Gaulli’s drawings of The Blood of Christ, but these are in far too early a stage to constitute serious evidence. When Gaulli adapicd Bernini’s Duplex Intercessio (for which see Brauer und Wittkower, plate 128) he put Adam at the foot of the Cross instead of Christ, whose pose he almost exactly retained.
1 See, for instance, the frontispiece to Damello Bartoli: De//a vita e dell istituto di S. Ignatio . . . Roma, 1659- .
2 Lanckoronska.
1 Lanckoronska.
2 Pecchiai, 1952, p. 129, and Pascoli, I, p. 201.
3 Pecchiai, 1952, p. 101.
4 CardeHa, VII, p. 299.
1 Carlone had painted the tribune of the Jesuit church in Perugia where Negroni had completed his studies—MS. at Gesù in Perugia—Busta 152/1526—5 and 6.
2 Maratta painted The Death 0/St Francis Xavier.
3 Pecchiai, 1952, pp. 132-7.
4 The arm of St Francis Xavier which was kept in the chapel.
5 Domenico Bernino, p. 171.
8 Thus he was especially anxious that Bernini should make the difficult journey to France at whatever cost to his health and that Louis XIV should be informed of the pressure he was exerting.
1 Domenico Bernino, p. 171.
2 ibid.
3 MSS. in Jesuit Archives: Rom. 164, if. 193-4.
4 ibid., Rom. 21, f. 174.
5 ibid., Fondo di Gesù, N. 865-18.
6 ibid., Rom. 163, f. 304—‘gareggiasse con !e phi magnifiche fabriche inalzate in più luoghi di Roma della sua liberalità . . .'
7 For Camillo Pamfili see later, Chapter 6.
1 MSS. in Jesuit Archives: Fondo di Gesù, N. 865-18—‘Si faccia quanto if Cavalier Bernino ordinerà, benché c’andasse tutto il mio... . .'
2 ibid., Fondo di Gesù—N. 865—4/6/7/8.
3 ibid., Fondo di Gesù—N. 865-19.
4 ibid., Fondo di Gesù—N. 1017, p. 95.
1 MSS. in Jesuit Archives: Fondo di Gesù—N. 865-13.
2 ibid., Fondo di Gesù—N. 865-13. For the fidi text of Brandi’s letters to the Jesuit fathers see Appendix 1.
3 ibid., Fondo di Gesù—N. 865-13. For Maratta’s dealings with the Jesuits see Appendix 1.
4 ibid., Fondo di Gesù, N. 101, p. 191, and see also Pascoli, I, p. 172.
5 See MSS. Cod. Palat. 565, if. 120-42, in Biblioteca Nazionale, Florence: Francesco Baldinucci: Vita del Padre Pozzo.
1 Tacchi-Venturi: La casa di S. Ignazio in Roma, n.d.
2 Pascoli, II, p. 265.
3 Quoted by Pastor, XIV, parte II, p. 26. See also Baldinucci MS. cit.
4 Pascoli, II, p. 256.
1 Pascoli, II, p. 257: ‘.. . voile uscir da tali soggetti, et inventame altri nuovi... . .’
2 Baldinucci MS. cit.
3 Tietze, 1914-15, pp. 432-46.
1 Pascoli, II, p. 260.
2 Pecchiai, 1952, pp. 259 ff.
1 Baumgarten.
1 For the history of this figure and the very interesting debate among the Jesuits that resulted from a proposal to move it to the church itself see F. Haskell, 1955, pp. 287-91.