# CHP-3



--- [Page 1] ---

Chapter 3
THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS
- i -
DURING most of the seventeenth century the many religious organisations
which had been formed within the Church to forward the aims of the Counter
Reformation acquired increasing riches and influence. Jesuits, Oratorians and Theatines
especially occupied important posts in the hierarchy; their churches were extended,
rebuilt, decorated and copied; artists eagerly competed for their commissions. By about
1700 the mother churches of these Orders were the most richly furnished in Rome, and
they have ever since appeared to travellers as the very embodiment of that Baroque
taste which, it is inferred, they deliberately fostered as an instrument of propaganda.1
The charge, later repeated ad nauseam, was first made by an English traveller in 1620?
‘In the next place’, wrote Grey Brydges, 5th Lord Chandos, in his Discourse of Rome,
‘the present Coiledges, Churches and religious Houses come in turne, in which of late
years, those of the Jesuits be of principall reputation where in their chiefe Church lyes
buried their founder Ignatius, and his tombe is there to be seene.
‘. . . Wherein is inserted all possible inventions, to catch mens affections, and to
ravish their understanding: as first, the gloriousness of their Altars, infinit number of
images, priestly ornaments, and the divers actions they use in that service; besides the
most excellent and exquisite Musicke of the world, that surprizes our eares. So that
whatsoever can be imagined, to expresse either Solemnitie, or Devotion, is by them
used.’
This passage, though it contains an element of truth, is a tribute more to the staunch­
ness of Brydges’s Protestant convictions than to his real understanding of the situation.
For in fact the patronage of the Jesuits and the other Orders was very much more
circumscribed by a large number of complex events than is immediately apparent.
In the first place, their very success effectively put an end to much of the individual
flavour that each had been able to contribute to the spiritual and intellectual life of
Rome. In their origins they had to some extent been isolated, engaged not only in
fighting the heretics but also in resisting some of the more worldly members of the
papal court, even at times the popes themselves. They had in fact consisted of relatively
small groups of the devout, clustered round some saint or natural leader, propagating
ideas that were often looked upon with some suspicion by the hierarchy, and yet
1 For the whole controversy about the Jesuits and the arts see Galassi Paluzzi, 1951, who, however,
does not refer to the book mentioned in the next note nor to other passages to the same effect dating
from before the nineteenth century.
2 [Grey Brydges, 5th Lord Chandos]: Horae Subsecivae, pp. 386 ff.

--- [Page 2] ---

64 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
encouraging in their followers an intensity of devotion that sometimes bore fruit in other
fields. Thus it has been suggested that the Oratorians may have given some special
encouragement to the anti-conformist religious painting of Caravaggio.1 As the century
advanced all that was changed. Even before Guido Bentivoglio came to Rome in 1600,
he was advised to get in touch with the Oratorians as they were the most influential
members of the clergy.2 Paul V was friendly with the Jesuits. Gregory XV and his
. nephew had been educated by them. One of this Pope’s most important actions was to
decree the canonisation of the two great Jesuits, Ignatius and Francis Xavier, and the
founder of the Oratorians Philip Neri—and the occasion was followed by spectacular
ceremonies and the commissioning of paintings of the two Jesuits by Van Dyck who
was in Rome at the time.3 Urban VIII followed much the same policy. He at once
published the bull of canonisation, and at all times he and his family showed their
strong sympathies with the Orders, and especially the Jesuits. In 1639 and 1640 he paid
two visits to their church, the Gesù, during the celebrations to mark the centenary of
the approval of their statutes, and his nephew Antonio, who was a special benefactor
of the Society, had one of these occasions recorded in a picture by Andrea Sacchi.4 No
wonder that the Imago primi saettili, the magnificently produced volume which the
Jesuits of Antwerp published to celebrate the centenary, stunned the world with the
audacity of its self-satisfaction.
Thus it came about that the Jesuits (and the other religious Orders) were too closely
integrated into the very fabric of society to impose any distinct accent of their own,
even had that been their intention. Their influence on the arts can be found everywhere
—or nowhere. It was a Jesuit, Padre Ottonefli, who pressed Pietro da Cortona’s claims
on the Barberini when they were having their palace decorated and who later wrote a
highly casuistical treatise in collaboration with the artist on the persuasive possibilities of
painting.5 It was another Jesuit, Gian Paolo Oliva, who became one of Bernini’s closest
and most influential friends. And yet the Jesuits had to wait for decades before they
were able to make any progress whatsoever with the decoration of their own churches.
For, curiously enough, their triumphant success in every field was for a long time
accompanied by an extreme shortage of money which made their church building
absolutely dependent on the support of the powerful families who ruled Rome. The
whole mechanism of patronage was determined by these families, and their superiority
1 Friedlaender, p. 123, and the forceful, but not necessarily decisive, rejection of this opinion by
G. Cozzi, 1961, pp. 36 ss.
2 Bentivoglio, 1807, p. 48.
3 La Canonizazzione dei Santi Ignazio di Lojola e Francesco Saverio—Ricordi del terzo centenario, Roma
1923; and also Redig de Campos, 1936.
On the other hand Leo van Puyvelde, 1939, pp. 225 ff, attributes the two pictures in the Vatican to
Rubens and suggests that they must have been painted in 1608 when the beatification of the Saints was
being discussed. There is absolutely no documentary evidence for this supposition and much that makes
it inherently unlikely.
4 Pastor, XIII, pp. 610-11. The picture is now in the Galleria Nazionale di Arte Antica, Rome.
5 Odomenigio Lelonotti da Fanano e Britio Prenetteri [Gio. Dom. Ottonelli e Pietro da Cortona]:
Trattato.

--- [Page 3] ---

THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS 65
was assured by legal as well as by financial forces. For in an effort to encourage the
reconstruction of Rome in the middle of the sixteenth century the rich aristocracy had
been given the right to expropriate neighbours who had no desire to build and they
were even allowed to dispossess unco-operative religious institutions.1 The patronage of
the Orders was deeply affected by this tendency, and the building and decoration of
their churches can best be studied as a reflection of the dialectic that ensued from it—the
clash, sometimes hostile, sometimes so smooth as to be almost imperceptible, between
two different types of patron, one with the spiritual authority that came from having a
saint as founder, the other with the money.
But another factor was involved: the limited number of artists of really
first-class quality. On the whole the patronage of the popes and their courtiers was
mainly directed into far more personal channels than the uncomfortably autonomous
churches of the religious Orders. As long as this patronage was really intense, few of the
great artists were given many opportunities of working outside St Peter’s, the family
palace or the titular church. Thus during the reign of Urban VIII neither Bernini nor
Pietro da Cortona produced anything significant for the Gesù despite the fact that both
men were closely associated with the Jesuits. It was only when this all-powerful source
of patronage temporarily dried up that the religious Orders, especially the Jesuits, were
’ able to call on the talents of really great artists. And even then it was recognised by
everyone concerned that the claims of secular princes came first: at the very end of the
century the Duchess of Savoy, who was most anxious to employ Ciro Ferri for a
certain job, wrote that the engagements he would be breaking ‘were only with nuns:
she did not therefore believe them to be such as to prevent him coming to Turin’.2
Thus the decoration of the Gesù, S. Ignazio, S. Andrea della Valle, the Chiesa
Nuova and other churches belonging to the principal religious Orders depended on a
synthesis derived from conflicting forces which varied greatly in strength at different
periods of the seventeenth century. This can best be understood if these churches are
studied before, during and, above all, after the reign of Urban VIII.
- ii -
The Gesù, the principal church of the Jesuits, was built for them by the most powerful
of sixteenth-century Cardinals, Alessandro Farnese.3 His assumption of its patronage in
1568 had at first seemed like a wonderful gift from Heaven; it soon became clear that
there were many drawbacks. The Cardinal treated the new church as his private
property—it used to be said, in a phrase that reveals much about the spiritual confusion
of a Renaissance prelate surviving into the Counter Reformation, that he owned the
three most beautiful objects in Rome: his family palace, his daughter Clelia and the
church of the Gesù. Farnese paid no attention to the wishes of the Jesuits; he employed
his own architect Vignola and his own painters. None of this mattered very much as
1 Delumeau, pp. 238-41.
2 Claretta, 1893, p. 33.
3 For fully documented history of the church see Pecchiai, 1952.

--- [Page 4] ---

66 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
long as he lived, for his schemes were as grandiose as could be desired. He commissioned
Girolamo Muziano to paint The Circumcision for the High Altar; Giovanni de’ Vecchi
began frescoes on the pendentives and the dome, ‘very lavish with various adornments
and putti’; plans were made for the apse to be covered with mosaics.1 But when he died
in 1589, with the decoration scarcely begun, the effect was disastrous. Not only did work
stop immediately, but as Farnese had specifically reserved the adornment of the tribune
, and the High Altar exclusively for his family, nothing could be done without the
permission of his heirs. These showed a total lack of interest in the whole matter and
for generations the Jesuits were unable, despite repeated efforts, to-carry on with the
decoration. They were thus compelled to concentrate on the side-chapels.
These chapels had a great attraction for pious ladies belonging to those older
aristocratic families of Rome, such as the Orsini, the Caetani, the Meliini, which were
already being submerged in wealth and political importance by the new rich who made
up the papal entourage. Some of them introduced their own artists, men Eke Scipione
Pulzone, Agostino Ciampelh and Federigo Zuccari; others paid for the main structure
of the chapel, but left the essential decoration in the hands of the Jesuits. Forced back
on their own resources, the Society cut down the expense by employing as principal
painter one of their own members, Padre Valeriano, whose crudity and clumsiness can
be benevolently interpreted as mystery and power.2 When they moved outside their
own ranks and commissioned an estabEshed painter their fmancial weakness became
dangerously obvious. Five years after producing a picture of The Resurrection Giovanni
Baglione was forced to complain to the Pope that he had not yet been fully paid by the
Jesuit fathers but was constantly being put off ‘with good words and the excuse that
they had no funds for the moment’.
In these circumstances it is not surprising that the decoration of the Gesù in its
early stages, far from reflecting any concerted Jesuit plan, was in fact achieved only
haphazardly and with the greatest difficulty. An informed visitor inspecting the church
in about 1623 (or even 1663) would have found an element of richness in the display
of coloured marbles but a thoroughly old-fashioned atmosphere about the half­
completed frescoes and altar paintings.3 Not a single one of the Bolognese artists who
had helped to transform church decoration at the beginning of the century was repre­
sented. For all its grandeur, and despite the impression it made on a raw English traveller,
the general effect must have been a little bleak.
But the Gesù, which was designed for public worship, was not the only Jesuit
church in Rome. They were just as concerned with the more private training of their
own novices many of whom would be sent abroad on horribly dangerous missions.
In the venerable early Christian temple of S. Stefano Rotondo, which they had been
1 For the contract with Muziano see Ugo da Como, p. 186; for the frescoes by Giovanni de’ Vecchi
see Baglione, p. 128; for Cardinal Farnese’s plans for mosaics see MSS. in Jesuits Archives, Borgo S.
Spirito: Rom. 143, f. 251.
2 See the b illiant interpretation of Valeriano’s style in Zeri, 1957, and the present writer’s review,
1958, p. 396. ...
3 See the Sacchi painting and the description of 1650 in Pecchiai, p. 104.

--- [Page 5] ---

THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS 67
allotted by Gregory XIII,1 a truly Jesuit style was brought into being for the first time.
The church was given to the German college, and the rector commissioned from
Nicolo Circignani dalle Pomarance a series of exceedingly brutal frescoes designed to
illustrate the martyrdoms of early Christian saints mostly enacted under the late Roman
empire. They were deliberately painted in great detail (curiously enough a last feeble
glimmer of the Venetian High Renaissance lingers in the murderous subjects), the
explanation of the torture was attached to each fresco, and the Jesuits took a certain
pride in these innovations of subject-matter and treatment.2
Indeed they planned to adopt them in the third church that they owned in Rome.
This was another early Christian building, S. Vitale, which was given to the Society by
Clement VIII.3 The decoration was directed by a Jesuit painter Giovanni Battista
Fiammeri under the immediate control of the General, Claudio Aquaviva, who took
a strong personal interest in the scheme and made suggestions of his own.4 Once again
the subjects were almost exclusively concerned with torture, but in the generation that
had passed since the decoration of S. Stefano Rotondo the atmosphere had so relaxed
that the true nature of the frescoes is not at first apparent. Rather, they give the impres­
sion of idyllic pastoral landscapes (in the nineteenth century they were attributed to
Gaspard Poussin), and it is not until we have examined them and the inscriptions below
with some care that we see that nailed to one tree is a martyr, and that in some distant
valley, shaded by hills, is a soldier undergoing the most exquisite tortures. Only in the
choir were the painters encouraged to throw off their restraint—here the exact mechan­
ism of how to pull a man to pieces is displayed with the cold, clinical observation that
comes naturally to those to whom such sights are familiar.
In practice, therefore, the contribution to patronage made by the Jesuits had been
exceedingly limited, however startling. This was largely due to their desperate shortage
of funds. The decoration both of another little church, S. Andrea al Quirinale,5 and of
S. Vitale was constantly being held up for this reason, and the correspondence of General
Aquaviva is often concerned with the problem of how to raise more money—jewels
to be sold, gifts to be solicited and so on.6 But the very austerity which they were
compelled to adopt could, if necessary, be turned to good account. In 1611 a French
Jesuit Louis Richeôme wrote a book, which he dedicated to Aquaviva, about the
1 Armellini, I, p. 160.
2 Jesuit Archives—MSS. Rom. 185, f. 25: Nécrologie del P. Michele Lauretano, scritto dal P. Fabio de
Fabiis,~i 6 Agosto 1610—‘Fu il primo che io sappia che cominciasse a far dipingere nelle chiese li Martirii
patiti da S.ti Martiri per la confessione di Christo, con le sue note che dichiarono le persone et le qualità
de tormenti, come si vede in S.to Stefano Rotondo; et dopo fù seguitato et imitato da molti akri.’
An anonymous Latin life of the same rector (ibid., Rom. 188,1, ff. 81-82) says that the example he
set was followed in other Jesuit churches.
3 Huetter e Golzio.
4 See the interesting letter from Aquaviva to Fiammeri of 22 August 1599 published by Pirri, 1952,
p. 4°.
5 For the history of this which was pulled down to make way for Bernini’s church see the account
written between 1606 and 1612 by P. Ottavio Novaroli in Jesuit Archives—Historia Domus Professae
Romae—Rom. 162, ff. 2-184.
6 ibid., MSS. Med. 22, f. I432.

--- [Page 6] ---

68 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
paintings in S. Andrea and S. Vitale.1 Extravagant pomp, he said, was nothing: he had
no use for the fake pilasters and columns, or the marble altars with which the Society
had pathetically tried to enrich their churches. ‘Car les ordonnances du tableau, ces
colonnes Ioniques, couronnées de volutes; ces pilastres, ces corniches et piédestals,
& autres peintures, & reliefs, ornements d’architecture ne touchent point votre dévo­
tion. . . .' Attention must be concentrated exclusively on the subject-matter of the
frescoes, which should be read like a sermon, more effective because paint lasted and
words vanished. But Richeôme’s was a last, lonely voice from the harsher days of the
Counter Reformation, valid more because it justified an unwanted simphcity than
because it proclaimed a doctrine that was at all likely to be followed in the more
prosperous and relaxed age of Urban VIII.
During the first twenty years of the seventeenth century the contribution made to
the artistic Efe of Rome by the Oratorians was. very much more impressive than that
of the Jesuits.2 There was both in their selection of artists and in the inspiration that they
provided for them a fineness of taste and a sense of exaltation that for long made them
true pioneers among the reEgious Orders of the Counter Reformation. This is not
altogether surprising. Despite their insistence on powerful visual imagery as a help for
devotion, none of the Jesuit leaders showed any subtlety of appreciation. St Philip Neri,
on the other hand, was a man of the profoundest aesthetic sensibility who responded
passionately to painting and music. He naturally attracted to himself many of the most
cultivated spirits of the time and he personally took an enthusiastic interest in the decor­
ation of his church. Moreover, the circumstances of its construction were very different
from those of the Gesù.
S. Maria deUa Vallicclla was assigned to him in 1575 by Pope Gregory XIII. It lay
in the very heart of fashionable and cultivated Rome. It was, however, immediately
felt to be too small and was pulled down to be replaced by a larger budding of the
same name, often caUed the Chiesa Nuova. St Philip’s early biographers delighted to
tell how the saint, with his unEmited trust in divine providence, ordered the destruction
of the old church without any idea of where he would get the money from with which
to build the new; and how this faith was rewarded by the people of Rome, rich and
poor alike, who flooded him with generous contributions. This attractive story is not
wholly accurate—there were grave financial difficulties, and Cardinal Farnese, jealous
of this potential rival to ‘his’ Gesù, was obstructive—but it illustrates one very significant
_ point about the new church: it did not depend for its construction and decoration
entirely on the goodwiE of one aU-powerful patron. St PhiEp himself worked in close
co-operation with the architect Matteo da Castello whom the Oratorians chose and the
church was built on the same general lines as those of the Gesù. The foundation stone
was laid in 1575 by Alessandro de’ Medici, Archbishop of Florence and ambassador of
the Grand Duke, and at first work proceeded quickly. However, the usual financial
1 Richeôme, p. 21. It must be remembered that these churches were intended for Jesuit novices and
not for the general public.
2 I have derived this account of the early history of the Chiesa Nuova from two fully documented
works which frequently refer back to the original sources: Strong, and Ponnelle and Bordet.

--- [Page 7] ---

THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS 69
difficulties soon intervened, and the Oratorians were now compelled to turn to a patron.
Cardinal Pier Donato Cesi was obviously very much under the influence of Cardinal
Farnese. He shared his love of art and of splendour and many of his plans were directly
based on those of the older and more powerful figure. When, therefore, he agreed to
pay for the completion of the Chiesa Nuova, he went out of his way to insist that he
should enjoy the same rights as those of Farnese in the Gesù. His arms too were to be
set up in the church, and he and his family were to enjoy overriding privileges in the
affairs of the Congregation. His terms were accepted, but he interfered little enough in
the building of the church and some years after his death in 1586, his brother Angelo
Cesi, Bishop of Todi, continued the family patronage.
The Oratorians thus kept the affairs of the Chiesa Nuova largely in their own hands.
Martino Longhi the Elder replaced Matteo da Castello as architect and by 1590 the main
structure was complete, though the façade by Fausto Rughesi was not erected for
another sixteen years. St Philip Neri insisted that the walls and the vault should be
merely whitewashed and not decorated with stucco, though whether for reasons of
taste or economy is not clear. The chapels were then dedicated to the mysteries of the
Virgin, the High Altar being assigned to Her Nativity and those in the transepts to Her
Presentation and Her Coronation.
In 1582, well before the completion of the church, the Oratorians had commis­
sioned an altar painting to be placed in the Chapel of the Visitation. For this they turned
to Federico Barocci in Urbino. The tender, feminine, almost morbid delicacy of his
picture, with its soft, smoky colouring, which reached Rome four years later, made a
special appeal to the mystical strand in St Philip’s nature. We hear that ‘he would sit
on a small chair in front of it and all unconsciously be rapt into a sweet ecstasy’. Then
the down-to-earth side of his character would reassert itself: irritated by the women
who came to gaze at him, he would have them angrily sent away and would do all in
his power to conceal the effects of the picture on him. Not surprisingly the Oratorians
were anxious to obtain other works by the same artist: they were unsuccessful in getting
from him an altarpiece of the Coronation of the Virgin, but they managed to commission
one of The Presentation of Jesus in the Temple. Another artist especially popular with the
Congregation was Pomerancio, for he had painted St Philip’s portrait, as well as an
altarpiece showing St Domitilla with a rapt expression, eyes raised and mouth half
open, between Saints Nereus and Achilleus in Cardinal Baronio’s titular church of that
name. - -
In fact, however, the Oratorians, like the Jesuits, generally allowed the rich families
who took over the chapels to be responsible for their decoration, and the result was to
change the character of the church and make it difficult for us to speak of a definite
‘Oratorian’ taste. Many of the new patrons were Florentines, like St Philip himself,
often of great culture, and thus it was that the paintings in their chapels were sometimes
of high merit. But with their intervention there was introduced a new note—of variety,
richness and colour. The same process had occurred many years earlier in the musical
performances for which the Oratorians were so famous. ‘Some years ago’, wrote the

--- [Page 8] ---

70 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
composer Giovanni Animuccia as early as 1563, ‘I published my first book of Landi for
the consolation of those who came to the Oratory of S. Girolamo. In these I tried to
maintain a certain simplicity which I thought suitable to the words themselves, the
nature of that place of devotion and to the end I had in view which was only to excite
devotion. But the aforesaid Oratory having, by the grace of God, steadily grown by
reason of the concourse of prelates and most distinguished gentlemen, it has seemed
proper to me in this second book to develop the harmonies and to give variety to the
music—composing it sometimes to Latin words and sometimes to Italian, sometimes
to many voices, sometimes to fewer, sometimes with one kind of rhyme, sometimes
with another; but I have refrained as far as I can from the complications of fugues and
other devices so as not to obscure the sense of the words: so that their power, helped by
harmony, may the more sweetly penetrate the hearts of those who listen.’ In other
words, the presence of ‘prelates and most distinguished gentlemen’ led to the artist
relaxing his austerity and relying on more attractive and varied means to touch the
emotions of his new patrons.
This inherent conflict between the Congregation itself and the fashionable society
that flocked to it is apparent also in the decoration of the church. Alessandro Vittrice,
who in about 1601 commissioned a picture from Caravaggio of The Entombment os
Christ for his family chapel, was the nephew of one of St Philip’s closest friends, and it
is therefore possible that the Oratorians welcomed the picture. In any case Caravaggio
seems to have taken special trouble to produce a somewhat more orthodox treatment
than he was accustomed to—the circumstances of the commission have not yet been
clarified.1 The way in which the next great picture entered the church is, however,
entirely characteristic of the pressures at work on the Oratorians.
The High Altar had been originally dedicated to the Nativity; its decoration had
been promised by Cardinal Angelo Cesi. In about 1605, however, two extremely
important events occurred.2 A majority of the Oratorians, after much debating, decided
to move to the High Altar a ‘miraculous’ image of the Madonna and Child, preserved
from the original church, and the money set aside for its decoration was found to have
been absorbed in the unexpected expenses of the façade. In 1606 Cardinal Cesi died.
At this moment of crisis, when the Oratorians were faced with a situation so familiar to
the Jesuits, they were approached by a highly influential cleric, Monsignor Giacomo
Serra. He was interested in an artist whom he was particularly anxious to promote,
,a young Flemish painter Peter Paul Rubens.3 If the Oratorians would agree to Rubens
being assigned the altarpiece Serra would pay 300 scudi towards its cost, leaving only a
bonus to be defrayed by the fathers themselves. Coming at that moment, the offer was
very tempting. And yet the Oratorians were cautious. They had never heard of this
man, and the thought of giving the main commission in their church to a Flemish artist
when there were so many Italians around was clearly repugnant to them. But Serra
1 Friedlaender, p. 187, and Cozzi, p. 51.
2 Jaffé.
3 Serra was also a patron of the young Guercino—see Mahon, 1947, pp. 67-71.

--- [Page 9] ---

THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS 71
said that if they did not accept his terms he would give away his money elsewhere, and
so, rather reluctantly, they agreed. They laid down stringent conditions. Rubens must
show them examples of his work, he must contribute towards the cost of the picture,
he must paint exactly what they told him: the Virgin and Child above, and below six
saints particularly venerated in the church. All this was agreed to and Rubens painted
the picture to their entire satisfaction. He then himself found that the lighting was
unsatisfactory, and persuaded the Oratorians to accept a wholly new proposal-—a central
picture to enclose the miraculous Virgin and Child and two lateral ones, each with
three of the six saints. All were to be painted on slate to avoid reflections of
light.
There is every reason to believe that the Oratorians were delighted with the result,
but it was undeniable that, as had occurred earlier with music, the pressures of ‘prelates
and most distinguished gentlemen’ had wholly altered the nature of their church.
Rubens had faithfully interpreted the instructions which had probably been handed to
him by the Oratorian historian Cardinal Baronio, but the spirit of the painting was
quite his own and, despite his great admiration for both artists, utterly unlike the altar­
pieces of Barocci or Caravaggio. It blazed with Venetian colour and vitality and
radiated an exuberant pathos which was later to prove of crucial importance for the
development of Bernini and Pietro da Cortona. Thus quite by accident the Chiesa
Nuova became one of the cradles of the Baroque. But an Order which could assimilate
within a period of fifteen years masterpieces by Barocci, Caravaggio and Rubens, to
say nothing of minor works by other artists, cannot be said to have had a specific and
individual ‘taste’ of its own. And it was not long before important contributions from
Guido Reni, Alessandro Algardi and others added to the stature of the church and also
proved who were the real patrons within it.
So austere had the Theatines been that the word lingered on as a nickname for
special gravity.1 In building and decorating their church they too experienced the
advantages and drawbacks of princely support.2 In 1582 a legacy from Donna Costanza
Piccolomini d’Aragona gave them a palace in the centre of Rome and the little adjoining
church of S. Sebastiano—it also obliged them to found a church dedicated to St Andrew,
the patron saint of Amalfi of which Donna Costanza had been duchess. Soon afterwards
the Neapolitan Cardinal Gesualdo agreed to build them a large new church, but—just
as Cardinal Farnese had done in the Gesù—he insisted that his own architects, first
Giacomo della Porta and then Pietro Paolo Olivieri, should have complete authority
over the man whom the Theatines themselves had proposed for the commission.
After the death of Gesualdo in 1603 there was the usual delay, with the church, already
planned as ‘one of the most magnificent to be seen’, by no means complete. Finally in
1608 Cardinal Peretti-Montalto, despising the advice ‘not to carry on with a building
begun by others’, took it in hand and guaranteed the vast sum of 160,000 gold scudi.
He brought in the best known architect in Rome, Carlo Maderno, and work proceeded
1 Cozzi, p. 46, and Formelle and Bordet, p. 343.
2 Ortolani, and, above all, Hibbard, 1961, pp. 289-318.

--- [Page 10] ---

72 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
quickly enougli for the ambitious young Maffeo Barberini to start planning his family
chapel a year later, followed soon after by a number of other Florentine families, ‘each
of whom is straining to make his chapel more beautiful than that of the others so that
it will be the most beautiful church in Rome’.1
Cardinal Montalto, as was usual in the circumstances, had reserved the main features
of the decoration for himself, and he too had grandiose plans. In about 1616 he promised
Giovanni Lanfranco, who was then working for him elsewhere, that when the time
came he would be entrusted with the entire tribune and dome—by far the largest
commission of its kind yet given to a single artist. However, in 162s Pope Paul V died
and was succeeded by Gregory XV, whose nephew Cardinal Ludovisi was the particular
patron of Domenichino. That artist, reluctant to miss such a wonderful opportunity,
approached Ludovisi and asked to be given the commission instead of Lanfranco.
Ludovisi had no rights whatsoever in the church, but, as Passeri succinctly pointed out,
he had all the irresistible power that came from his position as papal nephew and he
began to apply it to Montalto.2 The pressure was naturally decisive, and Domenichino
was given the job. However, Montalto then made a determined effort to reassert his
rights, and insisted that Lanfranco should at least be given the dome. To Domenichino’s
somewhat unreasonable fury this compromise was agreed upon, and the two artists, by
now irreconcilable enemies, shared tire commission. The Theatines, it need hardly be
said, played no part whatsoever in these decisions.
For all the trouble it had caused, the decoration of S. Andrea della Valle was by
far the most important achievement of the Baroque as yet. Lanfranco’s dome, which
was completed in 1627,3 was the first of its kind since Correggio’s in Parma more than
a century earlier and it served as a model to artists for the next hundred years. Light is
the centre, radiating out from Christ, its source in the lantern, and gradually filling the
whole surface, around which the choirs of saints, martyrs, prophets, apostles and cherubs
hymn their praises. Towards that light the Virgin gazes in ecstasy, her arms outstretched
both to welcome it and to point out with an expressive gesture the adoring figures on
each side of her—St Andrew who sponsors S. Gaetano, founder of the Theatine order,
and St Peter with St Andrew Avellino, the Theatine beatified in 1624 when the fresco
was probably begun. .
Meanwhile Domenichino was at work on his share of the commission. Breaking
away from his more classical manner, he produced in the pendentives four monumental
figures of the Evangelists, clearly derived from Michelangelo and stored with potential
energy, surrounded by putti, traditional emblems and the arms of his reluctant patron.
In the apse he portrayed scenes from the life of St Andrew. By 1628, when both artists
had completed their tasks, there could be no doubt that S. Andrea della Valle was the
finest modern church in Rome and that the Theatines without much effort on their
part had far outdistanced the Jesuits and the Oratorians.
1 Avviso of 30 April 1608, quoted by Orbaan, 1920, pp. 107-8.
2 Passeri, pp. 45 and 148.
3 Pastor, XIII, p. 965, note 3.

--- [Page 11] ---

Plate 13
Pietro da Cortona: Glorification, of the Reign of Urban VIII

--- [Page 12] ---

JESUIT PATRONAGE OF THE ARTS
Plate 14 (see Plates 14, 15 and 16)
Gaulle Triumph of Name'ofJesus on nave of Gesù

--- [Page 13] ---

Plate 15
Andrea Pozzo: Modello for fresco on vault o£ S. Ignazio, Rome

--- [Page 14] ---

Piate i6
lanirinO
1n
aerdnA
.SFo
roiretni
:
ïNINïte
B

--- [Page 15] ---

THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS 73
— iii —
It is an ironical fact that for all the general benevolence shown towards the Jesuits by
the Barberini it should have been left to the chief rival and bitter enemy of the family
to have built a second great church for the Society. Cardinal Ludovico Ludovisi was an
intelligent and energetic young man who had enjoyed for only two years the privileges
and status of papal nephew. He had made the most of them. With the riches poured on
him by his uncle Gregory XV he had accumulated vast estates in and around Rome,
built up what was possibly the finest collection of antique sculpture ever seen in the city,
and patronised the leading artists of his native Emilia to marvellous effect, as is shown
by Guercino’s fresco of Aurora on the ceiling of the casino on the Pincio which he had
bought from Cardinal del Monte. The Pope was old at the time of his election and in
constant ill-health; Cardinal Ludovisi had thus been a powerful figure politically and
had acted in the interests of Spain. In the conclave of 1623 which followed his uncle’s
death he did what he could to prevent the election of Maffeo Barberini. He failed in this
aim and paid the inevitable price. After a succession of disputes with the new Pope, he
was at one stage ordered to return to his archbishopric at Bologna on pain of being sent
there by force. He died after a stormy life in 1632 at the age of 37.1
In 1622 Cardinal Ludovisi decided to use a significant proportion of his immense
wealth on building a new church for the Jesuits to be dedicated to St Ignatius. His
affection for the Society went back to his school days, and he decided that the building,
for which he at once laid down 100,000 scudi, should be ‘second to none for size and
beauty’. But his first move was not a success. He had planned it near the novitiate of
S. Andrea. The Pope at once objected as he said that the height of the new building
would interfere with his view from the Quirinal. So Cardinal Ludovisi moved it next
to the Collegio Romano, the Jesuit college in the centre of Rome,2 and building
began in 1626. From now on his difficulties were to be with the Jesuits themselves.
The situation of the Society had greatly altered since the days when they had
quietly accepted the instructions of the all-powerful Cardinal Farnese. Indeed, Cardinal
Ludovisi himself explained that his admiration for the Jesuits was partly due to ‘the
power and authority that they have over nearly all princes’.3 Now he too was to experi­
ence this power, though its workings can only be dimly discerned through the inferences
and hints of contemporary authors. All sources agree that Cardinal Ludovisi organised
a competition for the architect, and that among those who submitted plans was
Domenichino, his special protege. Then the mystery begins. Passeri, the artist’s great
friend, is strangely reticent4: ‘... and Domenico was among those who competed; but
God knows what fate dealt out to him: indeed there is no point in talking of the matter’.
Bellori, on the other hand, is much more explicit.5 He says that Domenichino made
1 Pastor, XIII, p. 445. For all available information about his collections see Felici.
2 Jesuit Archives, No. 1238—ia theca; Vitae satti di Ludovico, Card. Ludovisi d.o S.R.C. Vice cancel.
Nepote di Papa Greg. XV scritta da me Antonio Giunti Suo Servitore da Urbino—Biblioteca Corsini, Rome,
MSS. 39. D. 8. 3 ibid. 4 Passeri, pp. 66-7.
8 Bellori, p. 350. Pope-Hennessy (1948, p. 121, No. 1741) publishes a drawing by Domenichino
probably connected with his project for S. Ignazio.

--- [Page 16] ---

74 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
several drawings for Cardinal Ludovisi, but that some Jesuits then went to the artist’s
house ‘and told him not to bother about the matter; because they wanted to follow the
design of the Gesù. This was the first and most beautiful of their churches and had
served as a model for others. Domenico answered that they ought to be pleased to have
two models, and that he would suggest an alternative; but it was all in vain.’ In the end
a Jesuit father, Orazio Grassi, of no architectural experience but celebrated for a contro­
versy with Galileo, was appointed. An eighteenth-century account says that Domenichino withdrew from the whole affair in a fury when Grassi made an amalgam of the
two designs that he had submitted, both of which were criticised by the Jesuits.1 The
Jesuit sources, on the other hand, do not mention Domenichino but merely say that
Cardinal Ludovisi chose Grassi’s plan from a number that had been proposed to him.2
It is clear that the pressure must have been considerable. Although Ludovisi continued
during the few remaining years of his Use to show great interest in the construction and
insisted on a committee of architects, including the painter Domenichino and Carlo
Maderno, closely examining all Grassi’s plans, the evidence suggests that he was patron
in name and financial aid rather than in any control he might exert. One of his last acts
before dying was to leave the Society a further 100,000 ducats.3
The Jesuits had taken so much trouble to keep control in their own hands in order
to reproduce on a larger scale the essential elements of the Gesù. But the church was
intended to serve for the students of the Coliegio Romano rather than for the general
public, and the patronage of the side chapels was not therefore entrusted to the Roman
patrician families but was assumed by the Jesuits themselves. That being the case, money
had to be economised, and the Society therefore followed its usual policy in the circum­
stances. It turned to one of its own members to carry on with the decoration. In this
instance the artist was a young Frenchman, Pierre de Lattre, from St Omer who had
entered the novitiate of S. Andrea in 1626.4 Two years later he went to the Coliegio
Romano, where he remained until his death in 1683. His obituary tells us that he led an
exemplary life and that he painted all the pictures that were to be seen at that date in the
church and sacristy of S. Ignatio. His name first appears in the account books in 1638
and turns up repeatedly for a dozen years. During that time he frescoed the vault of
the sacristy, completed six pictures for the side chapels and painted an imitation altar
on the inner wall of the apse. The little of his work that has survived shows him to have
been an utterly insignificant artist.
Cardinal Ludovisi had died in 1632, and as usual in such cases his heirs proved
reluctant to carry on with the great expenditure that was still needed. In 1640 the first
mass could be celebrated in the new church, but it still had no vault. Not for another
ten years was it finally opened to the public; even then it was half unfinished and
1 Soprani, II, p. 10.
2 MS. by P. Gerolamo Nappi (1584-1648) quoted by [Bricarelli], 1924.
3 Besides the documents in Pollak, 1927, I, pp. 144-58, see Libra Mastro A of the church in the Jesuit
Archives. See also Hibbard, 1971, pp. 232-4.
4 Besides repeated entries in Libra Mastro A see Galassi Paluzzi, 1926, p. 542.

--- [Page 17] ---

THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS
75
for another full generation the temple that was to have been so ‘magnificent’ lay white
and bare.1 Once again the Jesuits had been outdistanced by their rivals.
During the reign of Urban VIII the Oratorians commissioned two works which
were of very great consequence for the development of Baroque art—a fresco by Pietro
da Cortona on the ceiling of their sacristy and a building adjoining the Chiesa Nuova
by Borromini to accommodate the library and the concerts of religious music for
which they were famous.
Pietro’s small frescoes of Angels carrying the Instruments of the Passion and of St Philip
in Ecstasy (in a chapel in one of the saint’s rooms), though in themselves not very
important, were of great significance for the future. For they began his close association
with the Oratorians which was to lead to his transforming their whole church, and
began it at a time when he was already the most fashionable and powerful artist in
Rome. Indeed, Pietro, was compelled to interrupt his work on the ceiling of the Bar­
berini palace towards the end of 1633 in order to fulfil his obligations to the Chiesa
Nuova, and the fact that he was allowed to do so suggests that the Oratorians must at
that time have been exceedingly influential at court.2
The choice of Borromini as architect for the Oratorio was made by one of the
fathers living there, Virgilio Spada.3 He and his brother Cardinal Bernardino were both
protégés of Urban VIII and enthusiastic connoisseurs. In the great sixteenth-century
palace near that of the Farnese which Bernardino acquired from the Mignanelli in 1632
there was assembled an exceedingly rich collection of pictures, many of them from
Bologna, where the Cardinal had served as legate between 1627 and 1631.4 Virgilio was
more interested in architecture—he himself was a dilettante who many years later
helped to design the richly coloured family chapel in S. Girolamo della Carità—and
he was a special admirer of Borromini whom he was to employ on certain alterations
in the palace and on the construction of an illusionistic colonnade in the garden.
' When Borromini began work on the Oratorio in 1637 he had just begun to make
an outstanding name for himself. For many years he had been employed on com­
paratively minor tasks under Maderno and Bernini, but his wholly individual person­
ality and principles made a dispute with the great Barberini architect inevitable. There­
after he was largely kept away from official commissions until the death of Urban VIII.6
In 1634 he had been entrusted with the building of a monastery and church for the
Discalced Trinitarians who had left their original base in Spain and settled in Rome
at thé beginning of the century. The site adjoining the Quattro Fontane, very near
the Barberini palace, was particularly small and inconvenient, and a great measure
of the enthusiastic praise which Borromini received was unquestionably due to the
1 Jesuit Archives: No. 1238—Ia theca: actorum ac diversarum cartarum inscripta: Ecclesia 5. Ignatii de
Urbe: saec. XVII-XIX, Mi infra—Notizie storiche della Chiesa, 1712.
2 For the date see Pollak, 1927, I, p. 436, and Brigand, 1962, p. 205.
3 Passeri, p. 262.
4 For Spada and his collections see Zeri, 1953.
5 For Virgilio Spada see Ehrle; Blunt, 1979, pp. 205-207.
6 Though he was made architect of the Sapienza in 1632.

--- [Page 18] ---

76 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
highly ingenious manner in which he solved the problems it posed.1 However, it was
also recognised that the style marked a radical departure from anything that had
hitherto been seen in Rome.2 This originality, as well as Borromini’s cheapness, was a
cause of special satisfaction to the Scalzi. ‘The plan of the church,’ they wrote, ‘is so
exceptional in everybody’s opinion that it seems that nothing like it with regard to
artistic merit, caprice, excellence and singularity can be found anywhere in the world....’
. This was written some years later, but in 1637, when Borromini was asked to design
the Oratorio, his plans for the Scalzi church were already known, and there can therefore
be no doubt that the Oratorians were deliberately hoping for an architect whom their
Trinitarian brothers found admirable for his revolutionary qualities.
These qualities found expression chiefly in the façade, where the delicate subtlety
of the broken curves matched the emotional tone of the music that was played within.
Like Barocci many years earlier, Borromini was able to interpret that particular strain
of Counter Reformation sensibility, tormented, attenuated yet sensuously appealing,
that was the special contribution of the Oratorians and that had no counterpart in the
more rough-and-ready spirits of the Jesuits.
- iv -
Thus by the time that Urban VIII died in 1644 only the Theatine church of S. Andrea
della Valle contained any considerable painting by the Baroque artists with whom the
religious Orders have often been closely associated.3 The Gesti, S. Ignazio, the Chiesa
Nuova all remained largely undecorated and the spectacular enrichment for- which
they are famous today was carried out only in the second half of the century. The
Capuchins alone had been the unwilling recipients of Barberini patronage.
It was the Oratorians who took the next step, although in grandeur of conception,
in artistic importance and in devotional innovation they were later to be far outclassed
by their Jesuit rivals. Ever since Pietro da Cortona had painted his small fresco on the
ceiling of the sacristy the fathers of the Chiesa Nuova had been trying to commission
further works from him. But the artist’s engagements with such powerful patrons as
the Sacchetti, the Barberini and the Grand Duke of Tuscany made it impossible for
him to undertake anything else. Now, however, thirteen years later, the situation was
quite different: the Barberini were in exile, and Pietro, who had already been working
for some years on the decoration of the Palazzo Pitti, was seeking every opportunity to
leave Florence. So when in the summer of 1646 the Oratorians renewed their appeal
and at the same time asked the Grand Duke to grant Pietro temporary leave of absence,
they were in a much stronger position. And after some delays and many promises to
continue working for the Medici, Pietro began painting cartoons for the cupola of the
1 See Relatione del Convent0 di S. Carlo allé 4 Fontane di Roma, 1610-1650, published by Pollak, 1927,
I, pp. 36-51. 2 Wittkower, 1958, pp. izi ff.
3 That is, of comparable importance to those discussed. There were, of course, other churches
belonging to the Orders with frescoes by leading seventeenth-century artists. The most significant was
the Barnabite S. Carlo ai Catinari in which Domenichino painted complex allegories of the Cardinal
Virtues on the pendentives of the dome (itself painted by a pupil of Guido Reni) for Cardinal Borghese
soon after those of S. Andrea della Valle.

--- [Page 19] ---

THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS
77
Chiesa Nuova in November 1646. Though he had had to convince the Grand Duke that
his absence from Florence was to be a short one, the frescoes were not ready till May
1651, and even then he had not completed the four pendentives.1 Yet the work had not
been particularly complicated for the basic problems it posed had all been solved by
Lanfranco a quarter of a century earlier, and in his fine Adoration of the Trinity and Glori­
fication of the Instruments of the Passion Pietro did little more than produce an elegant
variation of the cupola of S. Andrea della Valle. Now once more an all-powerful Pope
temporarily put an end to the Oratorians’ plans for completing the enrichment of their
church. Innocent X after some hesitation turned to Pietro da Cortona to fresco the vault
of his family’s palace in the Piazza Navona, and not till he had completed this at the end
of 1654 was he able to resume work on the Oratorian church. He then painted on the
pendentives of the cupola the four prophets who had foretold the coming of the Virgin
and the Redeemer—Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Daniel; and in the apse The Assump­
tion of the Virgin, acclaimed by a number of saints, among whom the most prominent
was St. Philip Neri. He began work rapidly, but once again there were long delays
owing to the intervention of the Pope, by now Alexander VII. In fact, the whole history
of Pietro’s relationship with the Oratorians shows how subordinate it was to his commit­
ments with more highly placed patrons. Not until 1664 did he undertake his last and
most important commission for the church—the vault of the nave. In this he was
required to depict a miraculous intervention of the Virgin Mary which had occurred
during the construction of the Chiesa Nuova. In recording the event the artist com­
pletely abandoned the illusionistic devices which he had used to such great effect on the
ceiling of the Palazzo Barberini thirty years earlier. The scene is wholly removed from
the spectator in an elaborate frame surrounded by richly gilded coffers, and its selfcontained nature is emphasised by the fact that the fresco represents—though on different
planes—both the real world of St Philip Neri and workmen and the supernatural world
of the Virgin and angels. The worshipper in the church is not required to participate in
the drama being enacted above him.
In fact, all Pietro’s frescoes for the Oratorians, though sumptuous and finely
executed, show a certain lack of imagination. He was a man, as is shown by Iris work in
the Barberini, Pitti and Pamfili palaces, who found greater inspiration in the triumphs
of this world than in those of the next. Mysticism did not come easily to him, and the
passionate nature of St Philip which had meant so much to earlier artists and writers
filled'him with goodwill but never lifted him to the heights. None the less, when he
had completed his commissions in the Chiesa Nuova, the Oratorians could claim to own
the most completely decorated church of any Order in Rome. The whole scheme was
eventually concluded in about 1700 when a number of leading artists chosen by the Ora­
torian scholar and collector Padre Sebastiano Resta painted fifteen oval scenes from the
Old and New Testaments which were placed above the arches of the nave and transepts.2
Some years after Pietro da Cortona had resumed work in the Chiesa Nuova,
1 Brigand, 1962, pp. 248-9. ,-
2 I-etter from Resta to Giuseppe Ghezzi, dated 28 January 1695, published in Bottari, III, pp. 490-1.

--- [Page 20] ---

78 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
further decorations were undertaken in S. Andrea della Valle. In about 1650 Pope
Innocent X’s all-powerful sister-in-law, Donna Olimpia, persuaded the Theatines to
commission Mattia Preti to paint the apse of their church. The artist divided the wall
into three large compartments and depicted scenes from the saint’s martyrdom. But
by now the frescoes of Domenichino (whom Preti tried to imitate) and Lanfranco of a
generation earlier had come to be looked upon as classics, and this combined with the
chauvinism of Roman painters led to the denigration of Preti’s style and his enforced
and embittered departure from Rome.1
In 1665 when Pietro da Cortona completed the great scheme which he had begun
in the Chiesa Nuova thirty years earlier, the Gesù still looked essentially the same as it
had done in 1589, the year of Cardinal Farnese’s death. Tapestries specially hung out on
ceremonial occasions might temporarily conceal the bleakness, but it was all too obvious
that the church had had no share in the great decorative schemes that were so striking
elsewhere in Rome. This was not due to want of trying. The Cardinal had reserved the
decoration of the tribune and the High Altar for himself and his family, and though he
had conceived grandiose plans for it, the work had scarcely been begun at the time of
his death. His heirs had proved wholly recalcitrant. Alessandro, the great captain, spent
all his life in the north, and lais son and grandson had no particular sympathy for the
Jesuits.
In 1661, however, a new General, Gian Paolo Oliva, was elected, and under his
rule everything was changed.2 A cultivated man and a great lover of the arts, he showed
the stubborn patience and diplomatic finesse required when dealing with difficult
patrons. He also had at hand a most unusual and fortunate opportunity. In 1657 a French
painter, Jacques Courtois, had entered the Society. Courtois—or Giacomo Borgognone
as the Italians called him—had come to Italy from Dijon when still only 15,3 and had
been taken up by Guido Reni and later made friends with Michelangelo Cerquozzi and
Pis tro da Cortona. He had seen army life and he soon made a name for himself as a
painter of battle scenes. In about 1654 his wife died after some years of stormy married
life and there were rumours that he had murdered her. Shortly afterwards he decided
to become a Jesuit and approached the rector of the Society’s college in Siena. He was
sent with letters of introduction to the General in Rome, and was there required to
prove his good faith by making strange use of his undoubted skill. ‘Finally my confessor
gave me a small portrait of a woman on copper and told me to change it into something
, -spiritual. I turned it into Our Saviour. . . .’ He then took the final vows and spent the
rest of his life in the novitiate of S. Andrea and the Casa Professa. The General of the
Jesuits at this time was the Belgian Goswin Nickel, but the outstanding personality was
already the Vicar, Oliva, and there can be little doubt that it was he who took advantage
of the new situation. Borgognone had entered the Society without brushes intending to
give up art for ever. Within a year he was painting in the Casa Professa a series of
1 De Dominici, IV, p. 27. For the comments of Cassiano dal Pozzo see Lumbroso, p. 195.
2 There is no full-scale life of Oliva, but references to him are frequent in seventeenth-century
literature, and many volumes of his Letters and Sermons were published.
3 Salvagnini.

--- [Page 21] ---

THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS 79
lunettes and frescoes glorifying the Virgin as well as a number of scenes depicting
famous Christian battles. He was also encouraged to go on painting for private patrons
and hand over his earnings to the Society. He and his brother Guglielmo painted much
for Oliva, but his great masterpiece was to be the decoration of the tribune, upon which
the new General had set his heart. To achieve this, however, the permission and financial
support of the leading member of the Farnese family, Duke Ranuccio of Parma, were
essential, and in 1671 the Jesuits opened negotiations with him.1 But the Duke was a
vacillating man who found it quite impossible to make up his mind. To persuade him
of the importance of the decoration that they required the Jesuits sent him their plans
for the rest of the church with only the tribune left bare. This, surely, would provoke
him into action.
The sketches, however, were not a success. The Duchess did not like them and
said that she had in mind an artist of her own ‘molto stimato et accreditato’ whom she
wished to paint the vault. The Duke remained cautious. He reluctantly agreed to spend
30,000 scudi on the tribune, but he was thoroughly confused by the Jesuit plans and
soon began to think of reasons for delaying them. If the dome was to be painted, he
declared, the ribs would have to be removed and this would not be safe. Admittedly
he had no authority over this part of the decoration, but he managed to imply that the
Jesuits were wrecking the church and lacking in respect to the memory of his ancestor
Cardinal Alessandro. He was always professing his anxiety to have the tribune decorated,
but whenever pressed he would say coldly that he was ‘not ready to do so at present
and that this was not the time to begin’. In vain did Oliva insist on the claims of Borgognone—‘our brother who is so excellent in things of this kind’—and encourage the
artist to make drawings of Joshua stopping the Sun.2 Months and years passed and still
nothing happened. In despair the Jesuits proposed moving the remains of St Ignatius
from the High Altar to the chapel in the left transept. If the Duke would not agree to
the decoration of the tribune, they argued, would he not at least release them from their
obligations to him and his family? But by now it was too late. In 1676, with the pre­
liminary sketches made but with no opportunity to achieve his masterpiece, Borgognone
died.
This brought the affair to a standstill. It was not merely that the Duke who had
been difficult enough about the expense of 30,000 scudi would surely be far more so
when he also had to pay the painter. It was that the Jesuits had genuinely wanted
Borgognone to decorate the central feature of their greatest church. He was, they felt,
the one artist capable of carrying out the vast work they had in mind. There was,
besides, the undoubted satisfaction that it was a Jesuit who was to undertake this great
glorification of the Triumph of the Order of Jesus. The insistence of Oliva and his
emissaries that Borgognone should be employed occurs throughout their letters—
indeed it marks the first step in a definite Jesuit policy towards the arts since the scenes
of martyrdom which they had had painted at the end of the sixteenth century.
1 Pecchiai, 1952, p. 109, for these and subsequent negotiations.
2 The subject is the same as that chosen for Carlone in the Jesuit church at Perugia.

--- [Page 22] ---

8o PATRONS AND PAINTERS
During the course of his futile negotiations with the Duke of Parma, Oliva had
been looking around for another artist to paint those parts of the church over which the
Jesuits had complete authority. He had originally considered three painters, Carlo
Maratta, Ciro Ferri and Giacinto Brandi, whose diversity of styles shows that he had
no preconceived ideas on the matter.1 Then he saw some frescoes by the young Giovanni
Battista Gaulli in the church of S. Marta and immediately included him in his list of
possible painters. Bernini, who had already employed Gaulli on some decorative work
of his own, was enthusiastic, and the artist had one further claim of overriding impor­
tance. Like Oliva he came from Genoa. In August 1672 a contract was signed between
the two men.
Gaulli—or ‘Baciccio’—had been born in 1639 and had already made a name for
himself as a brilliant portrait painter. But his only important decorative work had caused
him some.trouble. The Jesuit confessor of his patron Prince Pamfili had decided that
the nudity of his figures on the pendentives of S. Agnese in Piazza Navona were
‘lascivious’ and they had had to be hurriedly clothed.2 It was a strange beginning for one
who was now to be entrusted by the Jesuits with the most elaborate commission in
Rome. For Gaulli agreed to paint the entire dome (including the lantern and the pen­
dentives which had already been frescoed by Giovanni de’ Vecchi); the entire vault
including the window recesses; and the vaults of the transepts above the chapels of St
Ignatius and St Francis Xavier. He was to omit only the vault of the tribune which was
being kept for Borgognone. All this enormous area was to be painted and gilded by the
artist at his own expense. The dome was to be completed within two years, and all the
rest of the work—gilding, painting and stucco—within eight years from then, i.e. by
the end of 1682. If the work was considered by experts to be other than perfect Gaulli
undertook to correct it without charge. If all went well he was to be paid 14,000 scudi
as well as all the expenses of scaffolding and so on.3
As the work progressed Oliva’s ambitions grew. The dome was ready by April
1675,4 and four years later the vault was completed. The experts who were invited to
a private showing were not enthusiastic,5 but with the general public it won ‘universal
admiration both for the beauty of the painting and for the arrangement of the stucco
which makes it still more worthy of applause’. When trying to resume negotiations
with the Duke of Parma for the decoration of the tribune, Oliva naturally spoke of
Gaulli’s work with the most fervid admiration and pressed home the moral6: ‘We have
at last,’ he wrote in September 1679, ‘through the grace of God, removed the scaffolding
1 In fact, as we learn from Pascoli, I, p. 125, Oliva had hoped many years earlier that Pier Francesco
Mola, w’ho died in 1666, would undertake the decoration. The account of Oliva’s later plans is also taken
from Pascoli. I, p. 200. 2 See avviso quoted in Roma, XVIII, 1940, p. 238.
3 Tacchi-Venturi, 193 5, pp. 147-56. 4 See avviso quoted in Roma, XVIII, 1940, p. 23 8.
5 See avviso of 12 August 1679 published by Pastor, XIV, parte II, p. 26: ‘conclusero tutti che sarebbe
bellissima, se fossero pitture meno spropositate et di qualche altra mano’, and further avviso if 6 January
1680. 6 Tacchi-Venturi, 193 5, pp. 154-5-

--- [Page 23] ---

THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS 81
from this church of the Gesù, founded by Your Highness’s ancestors for the Society
and renowned among the miracles of Rome... . Already the parts which remain to be
painted and gilded are being prepared, and all that remains is the head of this famous
temple, which by special rights belongs to the house of the founder. The very crown
of the work depends on the tribune. But, without the special command and generosity
of Your Highness, the scaffolding cannot go up nor can the work be completed.’ He
scarcely dared, he added, suggest that Gaulli be given this further task, although that
painter had ‘surpassed himself in the work and is considered to be as good as the very
best artists’. Ranuccio’s reaction was entirely characteristic. He agreed to the employ­
ment of Gaulli and offered to pay 3000 scudi—exactly one-tenth of what had been asked
for. So the tribune and High Altar remained bare and Gaulli merely painted a small
fraction of the vault above it and the conch of the apse. Finally in 1685 he completed
his work in the church by painting the left transept above the altar of St Ignatius; for,
as will be seen on a later page, the chapel of St Francis Xavier was decorated by another
artist after giving rise to further difficulties.
The respective parts played by Oliva, Bernini and Gaulli in the frescoes of the
Gesù are not known. No programme has come to light, and it is probable that the
relations between the three men were so close that more was arranged by the spoken
than by the written word. Certainly Bernini’s part in the undertaking was stressed from
the very first and has been accepted by historians ever since.1 The share of Oliva can
be inferred from a certain complexity in the iconography.
During the 1670s, when the frescoes were being devised and executed, the Roman
Church was shaken by the most serious controversy that had faced it since the Council
of Trent.2 Crucially implicated, at the very centre of the whirlwind, was the Society of
Jesus and, in particular, its General, Oliva. The trouble had started soon after the arrival
in 1664 of a Spanish priest, Miguel de Molinos, who rapidly acquired a wide and
exceedingly influential following by preaching two especially appealing doctrines: that
communion could be administered daily to the faithful if they required it and that far
more stress should be placed on passive contemplation than active meditation. Both of
these views—and particularly the latter—were directly opposed to those of the Jesuits,
who soon reacted strongly with all the intellectual and political weapons , at their
command. It is always difficult for the opponents in any serious controversy to distin­
guish between real questions of principle and more petty motives of jealousy. Certainly
the Jesuits; quite apart from the doctrinal issues which divided them from Molinos,
cannot have viewed with any enthusiasm his growing prestige in those very spheres
- 1 Thus an avviso of 1675 (Roma, XVIII, 1940, p. 23 8) reported the occasion as follows: ‘hanno li
P. P. Giesuiti scoperto la cuppola della loro Chiesa . .. dipinta da nuovo con disegno del Cavalier Bernini,
a fattura d’un tale Baccici Fiorentino [sic], e da molti virtuosi non viene troppo lodata l’invenzione del
primo, come anche il lavoro del secondo’. For a modem examination of the problem see Enggass, 1957,
pp. 303-5.
2 For all this section see the well-documented but very hostile Paul Dudon and also J. de Guibert,
as well as the various collections of Oliva’s sermons and the account given in Pastor, XIV, parte II, pp.
325 if-

--- [Page 24] ---

82 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
which had hitherto been subject almost exclusively to their own influences—the aristo­
cratic society of Rome and the papal court itself. This, no doubt, played its part in the
violence of their reaction and made them more determined than ever to assert their
irresistible power as ostentatiously as possible. Some such consideration must have
weighed in Oliva's mind as he took time off from the problem of Molinos to consider
the decoration of the Gesù.
Yet, as often happens in complex disputes, the issues were not wholly clear-cut.
Both sides were arguing within the same climate of ideas, and in many cases the discus­
sion concerned nuances rather than easily explicable doctrines. A thème especially dear
to Molinos—and one, of course, by no means new—was that of the Blood of Christ in
which the soul could purify itself of guilt and sin. ‘It is certain’, he wrote in his Guida
Spirituale,1 ‘that before the soul is ready to enter into the presence of the divinity and
unite with it, it must wash itself with the precious Blood of the Redeemer and adorn
itself with the richness of His Passion.’ Among those deeply affected by this same con­
cept—though it is impossible to say whether or not he derived the notion from Molinos
—wafs Bernini. ‘He would sometimes think very deeply and also talk about a matter of
the highest consequence—the belief that he always had in the powers of the Blood of
Christ in which, he used to say, he hoped to drown his sins.’2 And in about 1668 he
employed an etcher to reproduce one of his drawings in which the blood streams down
from the wounds of the crucified Christ into an eternal, boundless ocean.
It was presumably Bernini who first suggested to Gaulli that he should adapt this
theme to the dome of the Gesù. A number of the painter’s drawings, almost certainly
connected with the project, survive—but were never made use of.3 Perhaps the theme,
innocuous when Bernini had first drawn it a few years earlier, had by now become too
closely associated with Molinos to be palatable to the Jesuits. Certainly they themselves
always avoided the mystical, and the etching taken from Bernini is unquestionably
tinged with feelings of passivity and quietism. More likely they realised that, whatever
its significance for private devotion, it was wholly unsuitable for the decoration of a
dome. In any case, Gaulli’s scheme, when finally brought to fruition, was based on a
different subject, although it retained links with the Blood of Christ and although it too
had been treated by Bernini. This was the Duplex Intercessio in which the kneeling
Virgin, trampling on a serpent and pointing to Her breast, and Christ, indicating His
Cross which is being carried by angels, together appeal to God for mercy for suffering
humanity. Below the Cross Adam and Eve join in the supplication, and around this
principal scene are groups of saints and kings in adoration.4 '
1 Book I, chapter 16, verse 117. 2 Baldinucci, 1948, p. 135.
3 These drawings are in Berlin and Düsseldorf. This whole interpretation of the iconography of the
Gesù frescoes is derived from Lanckoronska, 1935.
4 Panofsky, 1927, p. 290. The presence of Adam and Eve is unusual. The figures were, however,
generally included in versions of The Blood of Christ and thus constitute a link between the two program­
mes. Admittedly Adam and Eve do not appear either in Bernini’s or in Gaulli’s drawings of The Blood of
Christ, but these are in far too early a stage to constitute serious evidence. When Gaulli adapicd Bernini’s
Duplex Intercessio (for which see Brauer und Wittkower, plate 128) he put Adam at the foot of the Cross
instead of Christ, whose pose he almost exactly retained.

--- [Page 25] ---

THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS 83
It was usual in Roman churches to fill the triangular spaces below the dome with
figures of the Doctors of the Church, the Prophets or the Evangelists. Oliva decided
that he would include all three and add to them a group which had not hitherto been
represented, the Judges. With miraculous ease the artist solved the problems posed by
presenting four figures in a single pendentive and made them sweeping enough to fit
in with his grandiose patterns, yet sufficiently individualised to be easily recognisable
and never monotonous.
It is, however, Gaulli’s fresco in the nave which is the most striking feature of the
Gesù, although it was originally to be no more than a prelude to the climax of the
tribune (Plate 14). Here the Jesuits were able for the first time to display on a large scale
what had for some years been an essential feature of all their visual propaganda through
the medium of book illustrations and the like1 : the theme that theirs was essentially a
missionary society concerned more with the winning of this world for Catholicism
than with the fate of souls in the next. With the dangerous heresies of Molinos daily
gaining ground, the theme was one of ever greater urgency and, as the vault was much
more accessible to the general public than the dome, the symbolism with which the
message was conveyed could be expressed in much more simple terms. To represent the
theme Gaulli ignored the classicising tendencies of his immediate predecessors and
returned for inspiration to Pietro da Cortona’s daring and revolutionary ceiling in the
Barberini palace of forty years earlier. Everything radiates from the golden circle of
light which emerges from the Society’s emblem IHS at the far end of the vault. The
rays plunge out through the circle of cherubs and throw into dazzling relief the ranks
of the saints and the blest, the Three Kings who first worshipped the Name of Jesus,
the prominent figure of the Church and the House of Farnese holding aloft a model of
the Gesù.2 From these it re-emerges with renewed and searing intensity to strike the
damned and the heretics, who are blinded by it and hurtled past the frame of the
painting on to the stucco decoration of the vault and, by implication, into the body of
the church. The colours are warm and brilliant, and an effect of cosmic drama is estab­
lished by the contrast between the blues and reds and browns of the figures and the
golden glare from the Name of Jesus, Whose triumph the fresco celebrates. To attract
the eye of the worshipper to this tremendous spectacle Gaulli devised sixteen figures,
which were executed by his followers in stucco and placed in the window niches along
the nave, whence they gaze upward in awe. They serve not only to bring into close
emotionaTcontact the two realms of matter and spirit but also to emphasise once again
the overwhelming power of the Jesuit missionaries, for they represent all those regions—
from Ethiopia to Peru, from China to Mexico—where the disciples of St Ignatius had
made their presence felt.
1 See, for instance, the frontispiece to Damello Bartoli: De//a vita e dell istituto di S. Ignatio . . . Roma,
1659- .
2 Lanckoronska.

--- [Page 26] ---

84 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
In the apse, which was completed only after the death of Oliva, Gaulli was required
to return to the more abstruse levels of theology which had characterised his frescoes
in the dome. He revived the subject of The Adoration of the Lamb which had been hardly
seen in Rome since the mosaics in S. Prassede and S. Maria Maggiore many hundred
years earlier. The choice of such an archaic theme may have represented a concession
to the original intentions of the church’s founder, Alessandro Farnese, for that Cardinal,
whose patronage was often marked by strange, mediaeval echoes, had once had the
intention of decorating the tribune with mosaics. But there is another possible reason
for the choice. In a less mystical and more attractive form it incorporated much of the
idea which had originally been proposed for the dome—the glorification of Christ’s
suffering—and at the same time fitted in more easily with the triumphant tone of the
rest of the church.1 Much of the traditional iconography was used. The Book on the
throne is sealed with seven seals, and before it burn seven torches. Twenty-four ancients
adore the Lamb; behind are youths with palms and angels trumpeting and lifting up
their thuribles to fill them with prayers. The theme appears frequently in Oliva’s
writings; but, despite all the brilliance ofGaulli’s handling, the transference into Baroque
terms of imagery, wliich had been so effective in formalised mosaic, has not proved
wholly satisfactory.
Gaulli’s achievement had exceeded all Jesuit expectations and he had been gener­
ously rewarded by Oliva who showed great patience in dealing with his fits of tem­
perament and angry outbursts.2 But the contract between them could not be completed,
for though the Jesuit missionaries might assert their authority to the ends of the earth,
the Society was still not master in its own house. Even at this stage the pressures that
had bedevilled Jesuit intentions ever since their early impoverished dealings with
Cardinal Farnese could prove irresistible.
The chapel, in the right transept was one of the only ones that long remained
exclusively under Jesuit patronage. It had originally been dedicated to the Saviour and
then to the Resurrection; for it Baglione had painted an altarpiece in 1602.3 On his
canonisation in 1623 the chapel was dedicated to St Francis Xavier and in it was placed
a picture of the saint which had been painted by Van Dyck. Towards the end of the
1660s, however, the patronage of the chapel was acquired by Monsignor Negroni, an
exceedingly rich and powerful prelate ‘tutto spirito e fuoco’ who was later made Cardi­
nal.4 From the first, Negroni showed that he considered himself the final arbiter in his
own chapel and that he intended to ignore Oliva’s plans for the rest of the church. He
commissioned drawings for a grandiose altar from Pietro da Cortona just before the
artist’s death in 1669, and so high was the projected pediment that the cornice had to
be broken. After Pietro’s death rival architects were soon writing to Duke Ranuccio
at Parma that this was ruining the architecture designed by his great ancestor. But
Negroni showed that he had powerful friends, for he caused the arms of Popes Clement
1 Lanckoronska.
2 Pecchiai, 1952, p. 129, and Pascoli, I, p. 201.
3 Pecchiai, 1952, p. 101.
4 CardeHa, VII, p. 299.

--- [Page 27] ---

THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS 85
IX and Innocent XI to be carved on the front os the altar and then wrote to Oliva to
make sure that the impheations of this gesture should be fully understood: ‘As I told
Your Reverence, I have ordered the stone masons to set to work on a record to the
eternal memory of these two Popes whom I venerate.’
But this was only a beginning. Though in later years he was to sit to Gaulli for his
portrait, Negroni did not wish to have his chapel painted by the artist and he chose
instead another Genoese painter, Gianandrea Carlone,1 and the most famous artist of
the day, Carlo Maratta.2 Very reluctantly and under extreme pressure Oliva was
compelled to agree to the change, and from the bitter controversy that followed we
can see what rights a patron claimed to exert over the decoration of his chapel.3
‘Worship of the Holy Relic’,4 wrote Negroni, ‘will be open to the public; the
rights of the chapel will belong to him who has dedicated it; and its upkeep will be the
responsibility of the Jesuit fathers.’ Neither the tone nor the substance were conciliatory
and the Jesuits were infuriated by Negroni’s claims. But the Cardinal remained stubborn.
He only wanted the authority that all patrons naturally possessed ‘as regards the essential
arrangement of the chapel—for instance, neither the picture, nor the capitals, nor the
columns were to be altered without his full agreement’. But this was to be the last clash
in the long series between the Society and its benefactors.
Many years earlier another great monument to the power of the Jesuits had
appeared in Rome. In the rebuilding of their novitiate church, S. Andrea al Quirinale,
they were faced not with the tyranny, hesitation or meanness of a rich patron, but with
the absolute supremacy of the most gifted and successful architect since Michelangelo.
Fortunately he was a man who profoundly shared their ideals and he was given a free
hand by the Society.
Bernini’s relations with the Jesuits remained very close throughout his Efe. As a
young sculptor one of his first tasks had been to help his father on the monument to
Cardinal Bellarmine in the Gesù, and, soon after, he had collaborated with the Jesuits
in the production of a superbly illustrated edition of Urban VIII’s Latin poems. Since
then he had maintained the firmest contacts with the Society. Domenico, his son, claimed
that for forty years he went regularly once a week to the Gesù.®
When in 1661 Oliva became General, this connection was still further strengthened
by the great friendship between the two men. Bernini frequently gave Oliva advice,
which was always accepted, on matters of artistic policy, and he also produced a number
of illustrations for an edition ofhis sermons. Oliva made use of the artist to forward his
diplomatic ends.6
1 Carlone had painted the tribune of the Jesuit church in Perugia where Negroni had completed his
studies—MS. at Gesù in Perugia—Busta 152/1526—5 and 6.
2 Maratta painted The Death 0/St Francis Xavier.
3 Pecchiai, 1952, pp. 132-7.
4 The arm of St Francis Xavier which was kept in the chapel.
5 Domenico Bernino, p. 171.
8 Thus he was especially anxious that Bernini should make the difficult journey to France at whatever
cost to his health and that Louis XIV should be informed of the pressure he was exerting.

--- [Page 28] ---

86 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
Bernini’s relationship with the Society was not confined to friendship with its
members and work for its establishments. In France he often visited Jesuit churches,
and talked much of his sympathy with Jesuit ideas. Oliva said that he could discuss
matters of spiritual importance with the deepest understanding,1 and all modern
historians have commented on the fact that much of his best work seems to fulfil the
ideals of the Society. In the novitiate church of S. Andrea which he began to build in
1658 he had his greatest opportunity of doing so. He was well pleased with his achieve­
ment, for when many years later he was discovered by his own son in a corner of the
church, he said to him: ‘My son, this is the only piece of my architecture for which I
feel special satisfaction in the depth of my heart, and often when I need rest from my
troubles I come here to gain consolation from my work.’2
This was at a time when the building was already considered one of the finest in
Rome, but as usual there had been many complications before the project could actually
be carried out. As the Jesuits had increased in power and numbers, the restricted size of
their patched-up novitiate on the Quirinal had become more and more unsatisfactory,
until by 1642 they claimed that darkness and humidity made it almost unusable.3 Two
serious difficulties stood in the way of any rebuilding or expansion. The first was the
refusal of Cardinal Bandino to sell any of his land which surrounded the novitiate, and
the second was the strong objection of the Pope to anything which would obstruct the
view from his palace.4 Tliis had stopped Cardinal Ludovisi founding S. Ignazio on this
site as he had wished, and even after the Bandino property had been acquired, the papal
interdiction was strictly enforced. In 1649 Cardinal Ceva agreed to build a new church
and lodgings, and he chose for the purpose Borromini, the most prominent architect of
the day since the temporary eclipse of Bernini.5 The drawings were made, but Innocent
X forbade their being executed. Seven years later, however, the Rector of the novitiate
appealed once again to the new Pope, Alexander VII, whose close friend he was. This
time he was successful, and after the Pope had satisfied himself that his view would not
be disturbed, he strongly encouraged all his entourage to contribute towards the expense.
By far the largest sum was given by Prince Camillo Pamfili, nephew of Pope Innocent
X, who assumed the patronage for himself and his family. Like all patrons he declared
at the outset his intention that the church should ‘rival the most magnificent buildings
in Rome erected through his munificence’.6 But unlike many of them (and most unlike
his usual self)7 he carried out these intentions fully until his death in 1665, after which
his example was loyally followed by his son. We hear less of financial troubles in
S. Andrea than in any of the other churches that have hitherto been considered, and the
1 Domenico Bernino, p. 171.
2 ibid.
3 MSS. in Jesuit Archives: Rom. 164, if. 193-4.
4 ibid., Rom. 21, f. 174.
5 ibid., Fondo di Gesù, N. 865-18.
6 ibid., Rom. 163, f. 304—‘gareggiasse con !e phi magnifiche fabriche inalzate in più luoghi di Roma
della sua liberalità . . .'
7 For Camillo Pamfili see later, Chapter 6.

--- [Page 29] ---

THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS 87
spirit of the enterprise, as regards both finance and the authority of the artist, can best be
gauged from an episode in 1663 when Prince Pamfdi went to visit the work in progress.
Finding that the expense was going to be much higher than anticipated, he left 1000
scudi on the spot and said: ‘You must do whatever Cavalier Bernini orders, even if all
my substance should go in the process. . . f1
In fact Bernini’s authority was felt at every stage of the building. Each bill, each
contract was scrutinised by him and endorsed with his vigorous initials.2 Workmen
engaged on the most menial tasks came under his direct supervision. He was himself
the virtual patron of the whole enterprise and refused all payment, including even battle
pictures by Giacomo Borgognone.3 Nor can his assistant Mattia de’ Rossi have put much
of a strain on Jesuit resources, as he was paid only in wine, the inevitable battle pictures
and two old majolica plates, which we have never succeeded in selling, painted, it is
thought, by Raphael of Urbino or at least someone of that school. At one time they
were valued at 50 scudi, but this was probably too high an estimate’.4
This marvellous church, with its richly coloured marbles and sumptuous decoration
entirely subordinated to an immediately striking and simple oval plan, was thus a pure
expression of Bernini’s genius, unfettered by the instructions of patrons or shortages of
money (Plate 16). Yet by comparing it to his other works we can see that its Jesuit
destination provided a very special impulse. Nowhere else is the iconography planned
so coherently with every element of the decoration symbolising in some degree the
dominating figure of St Andrew who rises triumphantly from the broken pediment
above the main chapel. And, as later in the Gesù and S. Ignazio, the emotional pressure
is such that normal architectural barriers are broken down to link Heaven and Earth in
a single unity. Daylight streams in from the lantern above the High Altar and is sym­
bolically identified with the glory of golden rays which radiates from the drum; while
spilling down into the chapel is a mass of golden putti—at first only heads and wings
and then, as they come nearer the ground, more and more solid. When the sun lights
up the gold and white coffers of the dome the effect of divine intervention is far more
poignantly communicated than in any fresco.
As soon as the main structure of the church was complete, the Jesuits began to
consider the problem of altar paintings. Although Bernini’s advice must have been
taken, the actual arrangements with artists were made directly by the Jesuits, though
-they were paid for by the heirs of Prince Pamfili who had died in 1667.5 Guglielmo
Borgognone who was commissioned in 1668 to paint The Martyrdom of St. Andrew for
the High Altar had already been employed in the novitiate with his Jesuit brother
1 MSS. in Jesuit Archives: Fondo di Gesù, N. 865-18—‘Si faccia quanto if Cavalier Bernino ordinerà,
benché c’andasse tutto il mio. . . .'
2 ibid., Fondo di Gesù—N. 865—4/6/7/8.
3 ibid., Fondo di Gesù—N. 865-19.
4 ibid., Fondo di Gesù—N. 1017, p. 95.
s ibid., Fondo di Gesù—N. 865-13: Thus Gaulli was paid 100 saldi ‘per le mani del P. Francesco
Scaramuccia quale disse pagarli di denari propri di detto Noviziato con animo di rivalersene dal Signor
Principe Panfiglio . . .’

--- [Page 30] ---

88 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
Giacomo. Gaulli was an equally obvious choice. In 1676 he painted the Death of St
Francis Xavier for the altar dedicated to that saint and was paid 100 scudi. He also painted
two more scenes from thelife of the saintfor the same chapel after aseries of complicated
financial disputes.1 Negotiations with another artist, Giacinto Brandi, to decorate the
Chapel of the Passion with pictures of the Pietà, Christ and St Veronica and The Flagel­
lation were prolonged and difficult,2 and Carlo Maratta, the best known (and best
paid) artist in Rome, took eight years to deliver his altarpiece of St Stanislas Kostka.3
The last chapel to be adorned was that dedicated to the Madonna. In 1691, twentyone years after the church had been opened to the public, a Jesuit document complained
that it was ‘affatto rustica’.4 It was then taken over by Cardinal Ottoboni, nephew of
Pope Alexander VIII, who commissioned altarpieces from Ludovico David of the
Nativity, the Adoration of the Magi and the Flight into Egypt and paid for them from the
funds left by Prince Pamfili. The latter’s heirs reserved the right, which they later
assumed, to change the decoration when they decided to embellish the chapel.
With the decoration of the Gesù and S. Andrea al Quirinale either completeor under
way only one large problem now faced the Jesuits. S. Ignazio, though open to the public
since 1642, still looked a vast white mausoleum, wholly unenticing amid the coloured
marvels of other churches. When in 1680 General Oliva summoned to Rome the 38year-old Andrea Pozzo to remedy this state of affairs his ambitions must at last have
seemed fulfilled. For here was an artist of real talent who was himself a Jesuit—a new
Borgognone, in fact. Pozzo, who was born in Trent, had entered the Society as a laybrother at the age of 22, and had enjoyed an enormous success in North Italy, where he
had decorated several Jesuit churches, notably at Turin and Mondovi, with spectacular
effects of perspective.6 Some of his paintings had reached Oliva who had shown them
to Carlo Maratta. On his advice Pozzo was ordered to Rome. When he arrived after
an unhurried journey, Oliva was dead.
The story of what followed was admirably suited to his romantically minded
eighteenth-century biographers, and they revelled in telling how the artist with the
utmost humility accepted the ordinary lay duties he was given by Inis superiors, unaware
of his talent; how he went through Rome, collecting alms; how one day these superiors
were discussing the spectacle they were to put on for the Forty Hours, and saying that
economies would be necessary in the stage-sets; how Pozzo volunteered to construct
the theatrical apparatus out of rags and used canvas—an offer that was rejected
'with scorn; how finally it was accepted and the result was a triumph. It is a success
story familiar through countless fairy tales. But Pozzo, despite the recognition of his
talents, was still faced with many difficulties.
1 MSS. in Jesuit Archives: Fondo di Gesù—N. 865-13.
2 ibid., Fondo di Gesù—N. 865-13. For the fidi text of Brandi’s letters to the Jesuit fathers see
Appendix 1.
3 ibid., Fondo di Gesù—N. 865-13. For Maratta’s dealings with the Jesuits see Appendix 1.
4 ibid., Fondo di Gesù, N. 101, p. 191, and see also Pascoli, I, p. 172.
5 See MSS. Cod. Palat. 565, if. 120-42, in Biblioteca Nazionale, Florence: Francesco Baldinucci: Vita
del Padre Pozzo.

--- [Page 31] ---

THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS 89
He was first required to paint the corridor linking the little rooms where St Ignatius
had lived.1 These had been preserved when the Casa Professa was built adjoining the
Gesù in 1602, and converted into chapels. The task of decorating this corridor had been
begun by Giacomo Borgognone, and left incomplete at his death. Because of its shape
it could not be treated as a single unit, and the artist therefore divided the walls and
vault into small scenes, separated by elaborate frames and putti. In them he depicted
various aspects of St Ignatius’s sojourn in this world and the next, and made such
excessive use of Iris great technical virtuosity that, looked at from the wrong viewpoint,
the decoration appears grotesquely distorted.
Just when Pozzo was beginning to be appreciated by the Jesuits, an incident occur­
red which almost made them lose him. The Duke of Savoy, in whose service the artist
had previously worked and who had reluctantly given him permission to obey Oliva’s
summons to Rome, now called him back to decorate a gallery. Pozzo asked the new
General to refuse him permission, but was told that it was his ‘duty to satisfy great
princes in their lawful demands’. He then appealed secretly to the Pope, above the head
of the General, and by him was authorised to turn down the Duke’s request. This
prince, thinking that it was the Jesuits who had refused permission, wrote another
personal letter, and when told by Pozzo of the Pope’s intervention, appealed to him also.
But the Pope confirmed his instructions to Pozzo, and the Duke was therefore reduced
to making life as disagreeable as possible for the Jesuits in his dominions, who, in turn,
blamed Pozzo for their difficulties.
The church of S. Ignazio had never been completed owing to financial difficulties
and disputes with the Ludovisi descendants. The Rector of the Collegio Romano now
determined that if he could not have a real dome, at least he would have something
which would fill the awkward gap where the dome had been planned. Various artists
and architects were consulted and among those who submitted plans was Pozzo, who
proposed to paint in perspective a flat piece of canvas to give the illusion of a dome. On
the advice of Mattia de’ Rossi, Bernini’s successor in S. Andrea al Quirinale and now
architect of St. Peter’s, his plans were accepted. Though he met with the derision of his
fellow-Jesuits, Pozzo claimed that he was as sure of the result as of a proposition of
Euclid,2 and his optimism was at first justified. When shown to the public in June 1685
his device was described as ‘very beautiful and ingenious, and it is thought that it will
be many years before they decide to build a real dome’.3 A later writer was quick to
point out that being on canvas the dome was bound to darken,4 and in fact within a
few years of being painted it was all but invisible.
For some years after 1685 Pozzo painted frescoes in the tribune and the apse,
representing there some of the principal events in the early history of the Society,
culminating in Christ’s amply fulfilled promise to St Ignatius at La Storta: ‘Ego vobis
Romae propitius ero.’ Both in subject-matter and in treatment these differ greatly from
1 Tacchi-Venturi: La casa di S. Ignazio in Roma, n.d.
2 Pascoli, II, p. 265.
3 Quoted by Pastor, XIV, parte II, p. 26. See also Baldinucci MS. cit.
4 Pascoli, II, p. 256.

--- [Page 32] ---

90 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
Gaulli’s frescoes in the Gesù: they lack both the theological complexity and the emo­
tional power of the earlier work. In some ways they mark a reaction against the
Baroque. Every figure is displayed to the full and the whole composition is given
rigidity by a bold architectural framework. That a work so immeasurably different in
feeling and style from The Adoration os the Lamb was accepted and welcomed by the
Jesuits shows either that their taste had changed out of all recognition in the last few
, years, or that this taste was sufficiently catholic to include anything grandiose without
too much concern for its style. On the pendentives Pozzo wished to avoid the subjects
usual for this position—the Evangelists and the Doctors of the Church—and to choose
something different.1 And so he painted Judith with the head of Holofernes, David
with the head of Goliath, Jael hammering a nail into Sisera, and Samson killing a thousand
with a jawbone. Though designed to illustrate the zeal with which heresy must always
be thwarted, the Roman populace was less reverent, and the word went around that:
‘anyone who wants to buy good meat should go to S. Ignazio, as four new butchers
have just opened there!’
Tt was’, wrote the artist’s biographer ‘because of the extraordinary reputation
acquired through this painting [the dome], not only by Padre Andrea, the artist, but
also by the Society, which commissioned it, that the idea was born of painting the
entire vault of the same church of S. Ignazio, the greatest task that could be performed
by an artist; and although the reverend fathers were agreed to employ Padre Pozzo,
yet they moved with considerable caution before undertaking it, so as to consult the
famous painters and architects of Rome.’2 The vault had previously been decorated with
stucco work, which the artist ruthlessly destroyed, saying that it was ‘more suitable for a
kitchen than for a church’. For this step, inevitable, of course, if he was to paint the
vault, he was so bitterly attacked that the Jesuits were frightened of going about for
fear of receiving some public affront. They considered, therefore, abandoning the work
and leaving the vault as it was. But by now it was too late, and in 1688 Pozzo began his
colossal undertaking (Plate 15).
In later years the artist himself explained the meaning of his fresco at great length.3
Essentially it was based on the words of Christ as reported by St Luke: T am come to
send fire on the earth: but what will I, if it be already kindled?’ Adapting this reference
from the Church to St Ignatius himself—had not the saint often encouraged his disciples
with the words ‘Go and set everything aflame’?—Pozzo turned the whole ceiling into
"avast celebration of the Jesuit missionaries. ‘... In the middle of thevault I have painted
the figure of Jesus, who sends forth a ray of fight to the heart of Ignatius, which is then
transmitted by him to the most distant hearts of the four parts of the world. . . . From
the breast of the Redeemer there emerges another ray which strikes a shield, on which is
painted the Name of Jesus, the crown of light. And this means that the Redeemer,
having as his purpose the glory of His name, wishes to honour Ignatius. . . .’
1 Pascoli, II, p. 257: ‘.. . voile uscir da tali soggetti, et inventame altri nuovi. . . .’
2 Baldinucci MS. cit.
3 Tietze, 1914-15, pp. 432-46.

--- [Page 33] ---

THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS 91
This short extract from Pozzo’s description makes it clear that he too was following
one of the constant features of Jesuit decoration—the impact made on this world by
the forces of the next instead of the more usual scheme in which the saints are shown
receiving their rewards and rising to eternal bliss.
All this lavish decoration turned the three principal Jesuit churches into the most
spectacular in Rome, as they were the first to point out.1 But even after they had been
completed, the very energy that had been employed seemed to encourage further efforts,
and in the last few years of the century many new works were undertaken. Among them
was the most elaborate chapel ever conceived, dedicated to the founder of the movement
which had so signally triumphed.
The chapel in the left transept of the Gesù belonged to the heirs of Cardinal Savelli.2
Dedicated originally to the Crucifixion, the altar had been designed but never com­
pleted by Giacomo della Porta. After the death of the Cardinal, his heirs seem to have
taken no interest in the chapel for over a century, and it thus reverted unofficially into
the hands of the Jesuits. When Ignatius was canonised in 1622, they moved his remains
to this chapel, and above them placed the picture painted for the occasion by Van Dyck.
Fifteen years later, the Jesuits were offered a superb urn, modelled by Algardi, in which
to place the saint’s bones, and at the same time Pietro da Cortona built a new altar to
' replace della Porta’s uncompleted one, the expense of which was presumably borne by
the Jesuits themselves. In 1646, the Eighth General Congregation of the Society agreed
that a more ambitious monument should be established. They drew up a memorandum
which pointed out that St Dominic in Bologna, St Francis in Assisi and St Benedict in
Montecassino were all suitably commemorated; surely St Ignatius, who alone of all the
saintly founders of Orders was buried in Rome, should also have a fine memorial. In
view, however, of the Society’s ‘extreme poverty and the disastrous times’, nothing
further was done. Four years after this a vast legacy was left to the Jesuits in Peru, who
thereupon planned to build a college in Ignatius’ birthplace in the province of Vizcaya.
The General of the Society, Padre Nickel, suggested that the money would be better
employed in decorating a chapel in the Gesù in Rome. But the Spaniards evidently
did not welcome this idea, and soon began to spread rumours that the General wanted
the money ‘for his own private use’. Again, the matter was dropped.
Meanwhile, vast sums began to pour in from all over Europe for the building of
the chapel. When Oliva became General, he was determined to have the monument to
Ignatius "hot in the transept but under the High Altar, as the most spectacular feature of
the tribune, which was to be lavishly decorated by Giacomo Borgognone. It has been
pointed out that the parsimony and delay of the Duke of Parma made this impossible,
and Oliva died, disappointed, in 1681. The four-year Generalship of his Belgian succes­
sor, Charles de Noy elle, was too short for much to be done, but under the Spaniard,
Tirso Gonzalez, who took over in 1687, the undertaking was again resumed in the
transept chapel. But there was yet another problem. The Jesuits were anxious that the
1 Pascoli, II, p. 260.
2 Pecchiai, 1952, pp. 259 ff.

--- [Page 34] ---

92 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
building of the chapel of St Ignatius should remain entirely in their own hands. The
site officially still belonged to the Savelli, and it needed the mediation of the Holy
Roman Emperor to induce Prince Giulio, the head of the family, to give up its patron­
age in return for special references to the beneficence of his ancestor, the Cardinal.
The Jesuits thus had the money and the rights of patronage with which to build the
great altar they planned. But many members of the Society, as well as various architects
, who were consulted, still thought, as Oliva had done, that the tribune was by far the
most suitable position. This, however, was impossible as the Duke of Parma flatly
refused permission, and so the Jesuits reluctantly resigned themselves to the left transept.
A competition was organised and caused an uproar. Architects and their patrons,
aware that this was the finest opportunity in Rome, jockeyed for position, slandered
their rivals and intrigued with gusto. The inevitable choice of Pozzo’s plans did nothing
to help the situation. Letters, signed and anonymous, poured in on the unfortunate
father in charge of the arrangements. The Duke of Parma was told that the church was
being wrecked; that in order to economise, white marble was being rubbed with yoke
of egg to make it appear yellow; that the whole organisation was a ‘confusion of babel’.
Pozzo threatened to withdraw; there were endless debates as to whether a statue or a
picture inspired greater devotion; more architects were consulted. Finally, in May 1695
after much hesitation, the General, Tirso Gonzalez, made his irrevocable decision and
forbade any further criticisms. Pozzo was put in complete charge of the altar.
He chose the craftsmen and organised competitions for the sculptors. To avoid still
more intrigues all the drawings and models were exhibited in the Galleria Farnese, and
the artists invited to be present. They were then asked to vote, in private, for the one
they thought the best, excluding their own. The most important piece of sculpture was,
naturally, the statue of St Ignatius, and the competition for this was won by the
Frenchman Pierre Legros. While the voting took place crowds waited impatiently in
the Casa Professa, and when the decision was announced, French students carried him
through the streets in triumph, shouting ‘Viva, viva, Monsu Le Gros.’ The authorities
of the French Academy in Rome, where Legros was a student, were less enthusiastic,
and after he had also agreed to make a large marble group of Religion triumphing over
Heresy to be placed on one side of the altar, he was dismissed for accepting private
commissions in defiance of his status as a pensioner of the King of France.1 He thereupon
remained in Rome and became the Jesuits’ principal sculptor. However, as if to show
" - - that they were in no way concerned to promote one particular style, they chose for the
group of Faith crushing Idolatry, to be placed on the other side of the altar, the work of
another Frenchman, Jean Baptiste Theodon, whose heavily classical lumpiness was a
total contrast to Legros’ dramatic, Baroque vigour. Two further large figures showing
Doctors of the Church were also planned, but because it was ‘considered not suitable
that [they] should pay court to the Saint’, this scheme was abandoned.
Within the altar itself there is much fineness of craftsmanship and complexity of
detail. But these more subtle features—such as the bas-reliefs depicting the life and
1 Baumgarten.

--- [Page 35] ---

THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS 93
miracles of St Ignatius—are embedded in such a mass of colour and riot of ornamentation
that they are easy to overlook. For here at last is that direct Jesuit assault on the emotions
that the Protestant traveller from England thought he had experienced nearly a century
earlier.
That this policy was now deliberate is shown by other commissions of the time—
most notably the gruesome polychrome figure by Legros of St Stanislas Kostka on his
deathbed, which was kept in a badly lit room in the novitiate ‘where it powerfully
moves those who come to see it’.1 But to sum up Jesuit art in this way, as did nineteenth­
century writers, is wholly inaccurate. All the art of the Baroque had a strongly emo­
tional character, and for much of the seventeenth century the Jesuits were merely trying
to follow current styles—often with some difficulty owing to lack of money or patrons.
When in the second half of the century they were at last able to employ artists for
themselves, their tendency was to stress the doctrinal elements of their beliefs in rather
greater detail than was usual in Roman churches. In fact, the powerfully illusionistic
art that they fostered in S. Andrea al Quirinale, the Gesù and above all S. Ignazio long
after such decoration had vanished elsewhere was prompted by just such considerations.
The Jesuits, even when spiritually decadent and attacked on all sides for the corruption
of their ideals, were above all missionaries. Their art was therefore worldly in a truer
sense than is generally meant by that term. They always aimed to display the workings
of God’s grace (naturally through the Society of Jesus) on the human soul and they
showed correspondingly less interest in the individual salvation of the already blessed.
It was this that gave a logical force to the ceilings of their churches that is lacking in
most others. In the Chiesa Nuova we look up and see a private miracle, wholly charac­
teristic of an Order that worshipped the Virgin and St Philip above all else; in the Gesù
and S. Ignazio we are witnesses of a universal theme in whose development we our­
selves play an essential part.
1 For the history of this figure and the very interesting debate among the Jesuits that resulted from a
proposal to move it to the church itself see F. Haskell, 1955, pp. 287-91.
In 1697 Padre Pozzo designed an altar in the left transept of S. Ignazio which Legros completed with
an appealing bas-relief representing The Assumption of the Blessed Luigi Gonzaga. The chapel in the right
transept was only completed in 1749 when Filippo della Valle and Pietro Bracci made a marble bas-relief
of the Annunciation—see Fabrini.
In 1710 Pierre Legros completed the monument to Pope Gregory XV and Cardinal Ludovisi in the
same church. Many documents relating to this project are preserved in the Jesuit Archives: Ecclesia S.
Ignatii de Urbe, 1255.