# 04 CHP-4 sec i

Of the private collections in Rome at the time of Urban’s accession, by far the most striking was the one belonging to the Marchese Giustiniani (Plate 17b).2 But he was henceforward to be a somewhat isolated figure. Politically he belonged to the Spanish fiction which lost all influence at court; artistically his taste had been formed during the first twenty years of the century, and now at the age of 59 he made little attempt to change it. It was a taste capable of appreciating quality in widely varying artists, and in a letter to one of his closest friends, Dirk Amcyden, a Flemish agent of the Spanish crown, he justified his eclecticism.3 With a remarkable lackof dogmatism he ran through the various themes and styles of painting. He contrasted those who painted ‘di maniera’
—‘where the artist after long study of drawing and painting does not copy but represents what he sees in his imagination’—such as Barocci, Passignano and the Cavaliere

[Page 95]
d’Arpino—with those who painted making direct use of the model—such as Rubens,
Honthorst, Ribera, the Flemish above all. And he concluded that the best way lay in combining these two styles as did Caravaggio, the Carracci and Guido Reni.
Now, however, he found himself unable to appreciate the Baroque masters of the new generation. Though he lived until 1637, he showed an interest only in three of the painters who had come to the fore under the aegis of the Barberini: Nicolas Poussin,
Claude Lorrain and Pietro Testa, all of whom lay outside immediate court circles. With great discrimination he commissioned early works by these masters which showed that he retained all his suppleness of taste where his sympathies were engaged. Poussin painted for him a Massacre of the Innocents, remarkable for the austere restraint which he imposed on so brutal a subject, and an Assumption of the Virgin, which was among his first works to reveal the impact of Venetian colour and classical studies. From Claude he obtained a mythological painting notable for its romantic stillness.1 But in general
Giustiniani turned more and more to the past and devoted himself to his passion for the antique. Between about 1628 and 1631 he was concerned with the production of two splendid volumes of plates to record the main masterpieces of ancient sculpture in his palace. Northern artists chiefly were engaged on the enterprise, and on the publication of the volumes his gallery became better known in the Rome of Urban VIII for its antique statuary than for its early seventeenth-century paintings, many of which must have appeared unsympathetic to the younger generation.
While Giustiniani, the excessively rich Genoese banker with his newly acquired title and somewhat marginal position in Roman society (to be rectified in the next generation by the marriage of his heir Andrea to Maria Pamsili, niece of Innocent X), was steadily accumulating treasures of all kinds, the descendants of the great old Roman families were plunging ever further into debt and disintegration. And yet they too contributed, if only precariously, a lively note to artistic patronage in the city. Paolo
Giordano II Orsini, Duke of Bracciano, was the last but one of his family to hold the title which he inherited in 1615 at the age of 24? Brought up in Florence for the most part, he absorbed from his father Virginio a passionate love of music and spectacle which remained his prime interests to the end of his life. Year after year the chroniclers report him visiting the theatres, taking part in amateur productions of plays and ballets, and indulging to the full in the brilliant and cultivated social life of the Medici court,3 around which there gravitated a dazzling group of artists and musicians, including
Giulio Parigi, Jacques Callot, Giovanni da San Giovanni, Filippo Napoletano and
Gerolamo Frescobaldi. After travelling throughout Europe as far as Scandinavia (where,
- 1 Poussin’s Massacre of the Innocents at Chantilly, incidentally the one of his pictures most likely to appeal to an admirer of Caravaggio, probably dates from 1628-9 and The Assumption of the Virgin, now in Washington, from a year or two later—Exposition Poussin and Mahon, i960, pp. 288-304.
The figures in the Claude, formerly in Berlin, are described merely as ‘ninfe’. Rothlisberger, 1961, p. 512, suggests that they represent Cephalus and Procris reunited by Diana. He points out that this is
Claude’s first landscape with an unusual subject.

[Page 9]
according to an attractive but probably inaccurate report, the Norwegians asked him to be their King) and soldiering in Germany, he moved to Rome and his life resumed its normal course.1 He befriended musicians of all kinds, including Monteverdi2; he was responsible for publishing the poems written by a number of admirers in honour of
Leonora Baroni, the singer who so captivated Milton3; and he invented a new musical instrument which he called Rosidra after the rose on his escutcheon.4 His two volumes of poetry in the style of Marino are respectfully mentioned and sometimes even quoted by the more indulgent literary historians.6
Orsini’s position in Rome was a strange one. Brilliant, versatile and handsome, the head ofone of the oldest and most distinguished families in the city, he was inevitably attracted into the Barberini circle.6 Yet he belonged to the Spanish faction, and his fortune and status were drastically falling as a direct result of Urban VIII’s policies. In the fifteenth-century fortress of his ancestors, lowering over the lake of Bracciano, where he came to relax from his palace on Montegiordano, he still went on with the old rituals—corresponding as an equal with sovereigns, reading news-letters that poured in from all over Europe, using his authority to secure advantageous positions for his retainers... . . But these moves were gradually losing all real meaning, and he must sometimes have surveyed the Roman scene with a certain bitterness, enjoying no doubt the tart little notes from his more sarcastic correspondents: ‘A gentleman who was asked what he had specially noticed in the play given by the Jesuits answered that he had seen three things—ration di stato represented by the Jesuits, atheism represented by four Pantaloni and idolatry represented by the Prelates of the Court—and though this was said as a joke, yet as it has an element of truth I thought it right to mention it to Your Highness.’7
Paolo Giordano was a vain man and something of a dandy. His variation of the current fashion—thick wavy hair, bristling moustaches and pointed beard stemming from the lower lip—carried it to the verge of caricature. He was most anxious to have his features recorded by the best artists of the day—who clearly delighted to oblige him. Ottavio Leoni made a superb etching (Plate 17c),8 and in June 1623, a few months before the election of Urban VIII, Bernini was already modelling his head in wax

[Page 97]
‘with the very greatest pleasure’. A little more than a year later a bronze cast was made, and Bernini took time off from his work on the baldacchino to direct the operation.1
Everyone agreed on its success, but unfortunately the head has disappeared, as have certain other smaller works which he undertook at this time. In 1631, however, we see him once more in a superbly spirited medal perhaps by Giulio della Greca2 and a year or two later marble busts of him and his wife Isabella3 who had already been painted by Simon Vouet.4 The concern for elegance remains, but a decade of pleasure and anxiety have left their mark—the features are coarser, layers of fat bulge round the neck, aristocratic refinement has given way to vulgar sensuality. Troubles were great, though he tried adventurous methods to retrieve his fortunes. Lord Arundel, ever on the lookout for possible treasures, wnote to his agent in 1636 of rumours that the Duke though ‘a generous Prince [is] mightily indebted, therefore methinks you might easily have of him the vaso, and those things you mentioned of his’.5
Yet he remained an enthusiastic if limited patron. He was very keen to obtain a bronze equestrian statue from the sculptor Pietro Tacca in Florence who sent him a modello.6 He commissioned a picture from Claude (a notoriously expensive artist) of
A storm at sea, designed perhaps to illustrate his motto of contra ventos et undas,1 and he was in touch with the Genoese engraver Andrea Podesta, who dedicated to him various prints of Bacchanals loosely based on the Aldobrandini Titians.8 He was the special patron of the Flemish artist Jan van den Hecke who dedicated to him a set of twelve etchings of various animals.9 He passionately collected medals10 and he took a personal interest in the decoration of churches on his estates in Southern Italy.11 Above all he devoted his attention to music while keeping a close watch on developments in all the arts. He was therefore an ideal correspondent for the ardent young Queen Christina of
Sweden, who was pining for news of the Roman scene.12 In 1649 through the intermediary of a Swedish diplomat they began to exchange letters and she was soon telling him of her picture gallery which had been recently looted from Prague: ‘an infinite number of items, but apart from 30 or 40 original Italians, I care nothing for any of the
In Appendix 2 I reproduce four unpublished letters to Paolo Giordano relating to Bernini.
' A Demonts, p. 314. The portrait has not been identified.

[Page 98]
others. There are some by Alberto Diirer and other German masters whose names I do not know, and anyone else would think very highly of them, but I swear that I would give away the lot for a couple of Raphaels, and I think that even that would be paying them too much honour.’ Paolo Giordano told her all the latest news—Pietro da Cortona was working better than ever, though he knew of no other famous painters in Italy except for Guercino who was now too old. Sculpture was in a much better way— apart from minor figures there were two most excellent masters: Algardi and Bernini.
Both, said the Duke, were great friends of his and both, he flatteringly implied, would be delighted to work for the Queen. Three years later, in 1655, when she came to Italy after her sensational conversion, she spent a night at Bracciano on her way to Rome.
Paolo Giordano ended a day of splendid ceremonies with a special concert in her honour.1 Within six months he was dead. Less than half a century later his nephew sold the castle and estates of Bracciano to the papal nephew of the day, Don Livio
Odescalchi.
Paolo Giordano’s collection had probably never been a large one. He was important chiefly as a friend of virtuosi, poets and singers, all of whom could meet in his palace, and as an exceptionally highly placed example of those gentlemen such as the Barberini nephews and Marcello Sacchetti who were themselves dilettante artists.2 Through men like Paolo Giordano, whose ancestors only a couple of generations earlier had been engaged in murderous blood feuds3 and who themselves retained the most exalted ideas of their status, the arts entered into the very fabric of aristocratic life. No doubt manners were softened thereby; it is easier to show that the arts themselves were affected by such patronage.

**Footnotes:**
2 See Ferdinand Boyer’s two articles of 1934, and Borsari.
3 Solerti.
1 All the earlier accounts (such asCrescimbeni, Vol. Ill, lib. IV, p. 197) tell the story of Paolo Giordano being offered the crown of Norway. So too does Litta. But C. de Bildt in his important article of 1906 gives cogent reasons for rejecting it.
2 Prunieres, 1926.
3 Applausi poetici alle plorie della Sig. a Leonora Baroni, Bracciano 1639.
4 Mandosio, II, p. 35.
5 Rime, e Satire di Paolo Giordano II, Duca di Bracciano. In Bracciano, 1649. See Croce, 1910, and Ferrero.
6 Arch, del Gov. di Roma—Biblioteca Vallicelliana: Fonda Orsini. The vast collection of documents relating to Paolo Giordano contains a number oflctters to the Barberini, though mostly formal Christmas wishes and so on.
7 Vallicelliana—Fonda Orsini: 170, c. 529, 10 February 1623. It is true that this dates from before the Barberini assumption of power, but the series of gossipy, dry and sometimes cynical news-letters from a writer who signs himself only II solito humil. mo Ser.re continues in much the same vein in later years.
8 Bartsch, XVII, p. 253.
1 This early bronze has disappeared and has never hitherto been mentioned in Bernini literature.
2 See Dworschak, 1934.
3 Faldi, 1955, pp. 13-15, dates the busts c. 1630. Wittkower (1955, p. 199) points out that the portrait of Isabella is largely studio work and suggests a date nearer 1635.
5 Letter to William Petty from Ratisbon, dated 8 September 1636, published by Hervey, p. 386.
6 I can find no reference to this work in Tacca literature, and in Appendix 2 I publish the letter from him to Paolo Giordano.
7 Rdthlisberger, 1961, p. 161. The picture has been lost, but it is recorded in the Liber Veritatis, No. 33. It probably dates from 1638-9.
8 For Podestà see Blunt in Revue des Arts, 1958, pp. 5-16.
9 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 377, and Bartsch, I, pp. 103 ff. The Duke of Bracciano for whom Pietro Mulier painted so many pictures (see Chapter 1, p. 7, note 3) was a descendant of Paolo Giordano II.
10 See various letters in the Vallicelliana—Fonda Orsini—184, cc. 212 and 218.
11 ibid., 181, cc. 227 and 267.
12 de Bildt, 1906, pp. 5-32.
1 Galeazzo Gualdo Priorato, 1656, p. 183.
2 Baglione, p. 367.
3 His grandfather Paolo Giordano I had had his wife Isabella de’ Medici strangled—an episode which inspired Webster’s White Devil.
4 The incidental literature on Cassiano dal Pozzo is enormous, but Lumbroso’s is still the only broad outline of his life with a large selection of documents.