# 05 CHP-5 sec i

OUSSIN became one of the leading painters in Rome. Yet he never worked in
Pfresco, was hardly ever employed by the Pope, only once or twice painted an altarpiece.1 Such was now the power of the independent patron to make the reputation of an artist and to guide his development. Deliberately confining himself to a restricted circle of scholars and humanists, he soon moved from the generalised battle pictures with which he had been forced to begin his career to a more and more complex interpretation of religion and mythology, often as difficult to understand as the great paintings of the Florentine Renaissance produced in somewhat similar circumstances nearly two hundred years earlier. The times were favourable. Never was Rome so closely aligned to French policy and culture as during the twenty-odd years of Urban VIII’s pontificate. Not for many generations had there been such a circle of intellectually minded connoisseurs, interested in all the latest developments in science and aesthetics, ready to encourage complex imagery and a more aristocratically restrained form of artistic expression than that which filled the churches and palaces of the great. Yet independent patrons of this kind were not the only ones who broke down the monopoly of Church and aristocracy in early seventeenth-century Rome. With the increasing attraction of the city to tourists and growing economic uncertainties conditions of patronage gradually loosened and we come across an ever larger number of professional art dealers in direct contact with living painters.
Dealers at first played an important part only in the careers of young and unknown artists. Every time we hear of them it is in connection with some painter newly arrived in Rome, unable to fit at once into the established system. Such, for instance, was the case of Caravaggio, who sold some of his early works to a French dealer called Valentin and through him met the Cardinal del Monte2; or of the Spaniard Giuseppe Ribera, who on his arrival in Rome ‘took to painting by the day for those who deal in pictures
- - with all the trials such work involves for young men’.3 Indeed, once an artist had made his reputation there would be no question of his ever working again for a dealer unless driven by the most acute distress. For they had a bad reputation both with painters and with the public. We hear that they tried to keep the young Salvator Rosa away from
There is a tradition that the Annunciation (National Gallery, London) comes from Pope Alexander Vil’s chapel at Castel Gandolfo. As it is inscribed with his name this may well be correct, though the evidence is not conclusive—see Blunt in Société Poussin, 1947, pp. 18-25.

[Page 121]
direct contact with possible clients so that he would be forced to work exclusively for them, and as early as 1635 Claude found himself compelled to keep a record of all his paintings, as copies of his works were being sold ‘throughout Rome’ as originals.1 One of the collectors who may well have been tricked by unscrupulous dealers of this kind was Lelio Guidiccioni, a poet in the Barberini circle, who ‘burned with extraordinary zeal and lust for pictures and spared no labour or expense in acquiring them’—only to find that he had been landed with many a doubtful ‘Michelangelo’, ‘Raphael’ and
‘Perino del Vaga’.2
But quite apart from cases of dishonesty, it was felt that the whole business of dealing in the liberal arts was degrading and somehow humiliating to the arts themselves. ‘It is serious, lamentable, indeed intolerable to everybody to see works destined for the decoration of Sacred Temples or the splendour of noble palaces, exhibited in shops or in the streets like cheap goods for sale’—so complained the Accademia di S.
Luca. For these reasons it forbade its own members to engage in dealing on pain of expulsion.3 But the Accademia was ever on the lookout for new sources of income, and in 1633 it managed to get papal authority to impose a special tax of ten scudi a year on all art dealers. As might be expected this caused a good deal of trouble, and ensuing controversies give us some insight into the situation.4
Dealers usually combined their businesses with some other activity on the fringes of art such as selling colours or gilding. But—and this obviously accounts for much of the resentment—they also included barbers, tailors, cobblers and so on.5 They were prepared to sell both old masters and works specially commissioned from those unfortunate enough to fall into their clutches. There were also sellers of rosaries and other religious goods who dealt only in small devotional pictures. All of them were bitterly hostile to the proposed tax and many succeeded in dodging it for years, although it was not until 1669 that they managed to get it reduced. By then their numbers had grown considerably and in 1674 there were at least a hundred, most of them installed around the Piazza Navona.6 As in so many branches of European trade, the great majority seem to have been Genoese, who naturally often dealt in the works of their compatriots.7
4Hoogewerff, 1913, p. 116, and 1935, pp. 189-203, with bibliography.

[Page 122]
We hear frequently of one Pellegrino Peri who lived near the statue of Pasquino during the second half of the seventeenth century and who employed the young Gaulli on his arrival in Rome, as well as Gian Andrea Carlone who refused to pay back a debt he owed him.1 The Flemish were also prominent dealers. The artist Cornelius de Wael, for instance, who left Genoa in 1657, engaged in extensive commercial activities and had a large gallery of pictures which were evidently for sale. He dealt principally with his own compatriots, both as regards artists and clients. Though he also owned early works by Gaulli whom he must have known in Genoa as well as smaller pictures by
Italian genre, flower and battle painters, he played little part in the lives of the more important artists.2
It was the financial turmoil that followed the pontificate of Urban VIII that changed the whole situation and gave dealers their first large-scale opportunities. Artists were left helpless by the policy of economic retrenchment pursued by Innocent X.
Large numbers had been attracted to Rome and their clientele was mainly Roman, built up over the long and prosperous reign of Urban VIII. Now suddenly the market seemed to crash. We get vivid accounts in contemporary biographies of what this meant to artists at the time.3 Among other results more and more painters had to work for dealers, many of whom exploited their distress to the full. Others apparently offered generous terms. Thus we hear of one Pellegrino de Rossi who gave work to Mattia
Preti among a number of unemployed artists who were attracted by his kindness.4
Another factor that encouraged the rise of dealers was the increasing number of Italian pictures which were being sent to France, Spain, England and other European countries during the second half of the century. Foreigners who came to Rome for a short time must certainly have found it easier to go to dealers than direct to the painter, who might often be capricious and unreliable. Similarly dealers themselves sometimes took the initiative in exporting works of art. Thus an innkeeper called Andrea Ottini used to get
Giacinto Brandi to settle his debts in pictures. He did so well out of this that he said that if Brandi could be induced to work regularly for him he would close his inn and take to the art trade. Without going as far as that, he still commissioned several works from him and sent them to France.5
But in general such commissioning of pictures from artists was rare enough, for as one dealer, Cornelius de Stael, explained to a client in 1663: ‘It’s very troublesome to do business with these gentlemen [painters]. I find it much better to buy pictures
- - already painted than to commission new ones.’6 Professional dealers did play a significant

[Page 123]
part in breaking down the tight relationship between artist and patron, but although we hear more and more of them as the years go by, it is very doubtful whether, in the seventeenth century, they ever ventured much beyond the relatively unknown painter.1
However, alongside dealers of this kind were figures more difficult to define— those marchands-amateurs whose activities even today are often not easily determined and who turn up again and again in any history of patronage. This type of dealer makes his first appearance cautiously, so cautiously that for a long time we fail to notice him. Thus
Ferrante Carlo, born in Parma in 1578, was a most cultivated lawyer and poet who was employed as secretary first by Cardinal Sfondrato and then by Cardinal Borghese, in whose palace he lived.2 Of a rather combative temperament, he took part in many of the literary and artistic quarrels of the day and managed to become embroiled with the two greatest favourites of the early seventeenth century—first the poet Marino and then Bernini whom he ‘wished to see exterminated’ because of some precarious alterations the architect had made in the structure of St Peter’s.3 His real passion was for pictures, and although contemporaries were doubtful about his taste and understanding, he was in touch with Cassiano dal Pozzo and many leading artists. His special favourites were the Bolognese and Giovanni Lanfranco from his native Parma. He befriended and commissioned works from all of these and owned a notable collection. But his passion was not wholly disinterested as we gather from an episode in 1631 when the Sicilian adventurer Don Fabrizio Valguarnera called on Ferrante Carlo with a few friends. For a time they talked in generalities about the qualities of the various painters represented on his walls and then Valguarnera asked if Carlo was prepared ‘to deprive himself of some of his pictures’. The answer was immediate: T agreed,’ said Carlo when describing the incident later, ‘as long as I received an honourable deal.’ We recognise the type.
Beneath the Oriental courtesies there must have been some shrewd bargaining.
Another strange sort of dealer, even better placed for taking advantage of his connections, was the Pope’s doctor Giulio Mancini.4 Like many a man in such a situation his inflated reputation as a great healer allowed him a degree of freedom unimaginable to ordinary citizens. A virtually self-confessed atheist, he deliberately encouraged his friends to eat meat during Lent and carried on a notorious affair with a married woman whose criminal sons he successfully saved from justice. As a doctor he was said to be

[Page 124]
efficient but brusque and he cunningly made use of his medical gifts to further his very real artistic interests. For when visiting his distinguished and fashionable patients he would suggest at the critical moment that some of their pictures would make an acceptable gift. Few felt like refusing just then, and from such opportunities he derived decisive advantages over all rival dealers and the knowledge needed to write a learned and most valuable artistic Treatise.
A third and almost equally influential figure who indulged in a certain amount of unofficial dealing was Niccolò Simonelli.1 An obviously efficient administrator, he served under various cardinals before ending up in charge of the Chigi household during the papacy of Alexander VII. He had some reputation as a connoisseur and liked to give advice on artistic matters. He assembled a notable collection of drawings by Giulio
Romano, Polidoro da Caravaggio and Annibale Carracci, his special favourite, as well as paintings, antiquities and cameos. He was clearly a man of independent and cultivated taste, for he was in very close touch with a number of interesting artists outside the main stream of fashion—Salvator Rosa whom he helped to launch, Pietro Testa to whom he lent money, Castiglione whose publisher dedicated to him a fine print of
Diogenes searching in vain for one honest man. Simonelli too took advantage of these contacts though he was obviously a much more respectable figure than Mancini.
When the French traveller Monsieur de Monconys visited Rome in 1664 it was Simonelli who took him round the studios, introduced him to Poussin and Claude and sold him the odd picture. No doubt he did the same for other visitors.
All three figures, Carlo, Mancini and Simonelli, thus had many features in common.
All enjoyed distinguished careers in the clerical bureaucracy of the mid-seventeenth century without themselves being in the Church, and all were friends and patrons of many of the leading artists of their day. But though they were prepared to use these
Passeri, p. 388, who refers to his relations with Salvator Rosa, says that Simonelli ‘stava in credito d’intendente’ and there are many references to him in Rosa’s letters.
Luigi Scaramuccia dedicated a print to him of Venus and Adonis on which he writes that Simonelli was ‘inamorato dell’Opere dei Carracci’. On the back of a drawing by Pietro Testa at Windsor is a letter from the artist to Simonelli which seems to show that he owed him money—Blunt and Cooke, i960,
" p. 115.
The occasional fact about his career in the Chigi household can be traced in that family’s archives—
Golzio, 1939, p. 155. The suggestion that his outlook on the world was not wholly conformist comes from Castiglione’s print of Diogenes with its strange dedication from the publisher: ‘Al Sig: Nicolo
Simonelli Mio Sig.re—Quel Diogene Cinico che con tanta gloria serba piu vive che mai le sue memorie baldanzoso risorge al mondo co delineamenti del Celebre Castiglioni e perche so quanto ella l’imiti ne suoi virtuosi Costumi e particolarmente nel cercar con la lanterna gli uomini ho giudicato che il dedicarlo a lei sara un accoppiamento felicissimo e che in altro non discordaranno salvo che esso potè con tanta severità disprezzare i favori d’un Alessandro e V.S. per superarlo ne gli atti della benignità sapra con cortesissimo animo gradire gli Ossequij della mia devotione la quale vivam. te la riverisco Di V.S. Aff.mo
Amico e Servitore G.D.R. [Gian Domenico Rossi] D.D.D.’

[Page 125]
advantages, shrewdly yet discreetly, to deal in pictures, to call them professional dealers would not only have bitterly offended them but would also give a wholly wrong impression.
-iiFar more effective than any kind of dealer in bringing the artist into contact with a wider public was the gradual extension of art exhibitions.1 The principal occasions for these were provided by the many saints’ days and processions which were such a feature of seventeenth-century life. The feast of Corpus Domini above all was associated with the display of pictures, but it certainly had no monopoly. No exact spot seems to have been indicated and artists probably exhibited indiscriminately with other craftsmen or merchants showing their wares. Obviously no artist of established reputation would ever think of lowering his dignity in this way, and those that wegenerally come across are minor specialists in landscape and genre and above all painters newly arrived in Rome or returning after a long absence. For such men exhibitions seem to have been useful and to have attracted connoisseurs of standing. They also inspired other artists: we hear of a young peasant boy who decided to take up painting as the result of seeing a stall covered with pictures at the fair of Sinigaglia, and Claude is supposed to have seen landscapes by the Flemish artist Goffredo Wals at an exhibition in Rome and to have been so struck with them that he went to study under him in Naples—a move which played a decisive part in his career. And another exhibition—though very different in aim and organisation—was actually arranged under pressure from the painters in Rome.
In 1607 the Duke of Mantua’s agent was forced to satisfy them by putting on view
Caravaggio’s Death of the Virgin which he had just bought for the Duke on Rubens’s advice—an occasion which was apparently attended by all the leading artists, who thus provided striking evidence of their growing influence and emancipation.
More organised exhibitions were sometimes held on 24 August by the Bergamasque community in Rome to celebrate the feast day of their patron saint, St Bartholomew.
These took place in the courtyard of the church of S. Bartolomeo and were paid for by the Guardiano. As in all Roman exhibitions of this kind, the occasion served primarily to put on a spectacular decorative show in honour of the saint and his devotees. The façade of the church was hung with tapestries, as were the houses round about, and an observer confessed that it was hard to decide which was the more impressive: the general-effect created by the hangings outside or the pictures spread round the inner courtyard. It is not certain when the exhibitions began, but they were certainly flourishing by 1650. S. Bartolomeo all’Isola arranged exhibitions for the saint’s name day, but they were less important. Despite their devotional purpose the exhibitions certainly provided artists with the opportunity to display their works and were far more dignified
For the exhibitions at S. Salvatore in Lauro I have made extensive use of the papers of Giuseppe Ghezzi now in the Museo di Roma.

[Page 126]
occasions than the casual saints’ day fairs. They attracted the attention of potential buyers, but it seems certain that here, as in all these exhibitions, purchases could not be made on the spot.
The most famous and well attended of all the regular exhibitions in seventeenthcentury Rome was the one held in the Pantheon each year on 19 March to celebrate the feast day of St Joseph. This was organised by the Congregazione dei Virtuosi, a
. confraternity consisting largely of artists which had been founded in 1543. Created in the characteristic Counter Reformation atmosphere that prevailed at the time, its main purpose was to promote good works in the form of charity and so on. As a secondary aim it planned to make use of the fine arts to glorify religion. These objectives were responsible for the nature and scope of the exhibitions which were certainly not designed to serve the artist’s desire for recognition and were at first rarely so used. They probably began early in the seventeenth century and came to an end some time before 17Ó4.
Each artist could submit one picture and a selection was made by the members of the
Congregazione. The pictures chosen were then arranged under the colonnade of the portico, while above the balustrade was hung a large Dream of St Joseph and probably tapestries. Both old masters and contemporary works were shown.
Quite soon artists began to make use of the Pantheon exhibitions in order to attract attention to themselves. In 1650, for instance, Velasquez, then on his second visit to
Rome, showed the portrait of his servant Pareja which understandably caused a sensation. As the great Spanish artist was already a member both of the Congregazione dei
Virtuosi and of the Accademia di S. Luca, and as he had already been commissioned to paint his famous portrait of Pope Innocent X, he probably wished to make his name known to an even wider public. In this aim he was certainly successful and it is all the more surprising that we hear so little of other artists taking advantage of the opportunity.
In the seventeenth century by far the most conspicuous of those who did so was Salvator
Rosa, who exhibited whenever possible. He was engaged in a running fight with the critics, he loved publicity and he was therefore determined that every year the public should see something new by him: ‘The important thing’, he wrote before the exhibition of 1651, ‘is that until now no one except Simonelli has seen the picture, as I have always kept it shut up in a special room.’
For Salvator Rosa, as for Velasquez, exhibiting at the Pantheon was exceedingly useful. ‘Last week’, he wrote in 1652, ‘I turned down the chance of going to Sweden—it all sprung from the applause I won from the last picture I exhibited in S. Gioseppe in
Rotonda.’ In fact, the painter’s main intention was to increase his reputation rather than bring in immediate cash, for pictures were not sold on the spot and admirers waited for the artist to take his canvas home before making an offer.
Some still saw the occasion primarily as a means for paying homage to St Joseph.
When making his will in 1654, the Flemish painter Jan Miei left 300 scudi to the Congregazione (to which he had belonged since 1Ó50) on condition that a yearly mass was sung for his soul ‘and that the brethren be obliged to celebrate every year the feast of the glorious St Joseph by having the portico of the Madonna of the Rotonda decorated

[Page 127]
with pictures, as is and has been done each year’. But although the main purpose of the exhibition was religious, the earliest records we have make it clear that devotional pictures were not insisted on and that portraits and pagan history paintings were often among those shown. Indeed, at the exhibition of 1680 the authorities ordered the police to seize two of the pictures on the grounds that they were indecent. We need not take the charge too seriously—a wave of puritanism swept through Rome that year and in any case among those who sprang to the defence of the offending pictures was a cardinal.
The other great annual exhibition held in Rome took place in the cloisters of S.
Giovanni Decollate on 29 August, the saint’s day. The circumstances were somewhat different. It was held under the auspices of the leading patrician families and evidently redounded to their credit at least as much as to that of the artists represented. It is recorded as a regular institution as early as 1620, but there are traces of it some twenty years previously. In 1603 Orazio Gentileschi explained to the judge during the course of a trial that there was a good deal of rivalry among the artists at work in Rome. ‘For instance,’ he went on, ‘when I had placed a picture of the Archangel Michael at S.
Giovanni de’ Fiorentini, he [Giovanni Baglione] competed with me by putting a picture just opposite it. And this picture which was called Divine Love he had painted in competition with Michelangelo da Caravaggio’s Earthly Love.’ But though painters might look upon the exhibition in this light, it is most unlikely that this was the sort of purpose it was intended to serve. Almost certainly the pictures were designed to decorate the church as part of the celebrations in honour of the saint. Salvator Rosa, however, made full use of the exhibition to show his work to the public, and much of our information about it is derived from him and dates from rather later in the century.
In 1662 it fell to the Sacchetti to organise the exhibition. Naturally, writes Rosa, pride of place was given to Pietro da Cortona, the family painter. But as the Sacchetti still had great influence with the Roman aristocracy they were also able to obtain the loan of old masters from many of the most famous galleries of the city. Six years later the Rospigliosi were responsible and they challenged all previous patrons by the lavishness of the display they organised. For Camillo Rospigliosi was the Pope’s brother, and he and his four sons had just been admitted as novices to the Compagnia della Misericordia which administered the church. The whole façade, the cemetery, the piazza and even the adjoining street were draped with rare and precious tapestries, silver and magnificent pictures. Owners of private galleries willingly lent their masterpieces, whereas before they had always been reluctant to do so because, so an avviso informs us, the papal nephews of the day found some pretext or other for laying hands on them.
In particular Queen Christina lent some of her most famous pictures. The Rospigliosi decided that only old masters should be shown and that all contemporary work should be excluded. But this resolution merely encouraged Rosa to challenge it. Though, because of the spectacular competition he was forced to face, he called the occasion the
‘Valley of Jehoshaphat’, he managed—alone among living artists—to get two of his pictures exhibited. It may well have been, therefore, in this year that his band of supporters went round Rome asking people: ‘Have you seen the Titian, the Correggio,

[Page 128]
the Paolo Veronese, the Parmigianino, the Carracci, Domenichino, Guido and Signor
Salvatore? Signor Salvatore is not afraid of Titian, of Guido, of Guercino or anyone else.’ But this misguided enthusiasm appears to have done the artist more harm than good.
Another lavish exhibition was arranged for the Holy Year of 1675 when over two hundred pictures were shown by the Medici. Outside the church were hung tapestries and damasks giving the illusion of stage scenery as the public walked among them; while inside the cloisters and in one of the rooms opening on to them were works by living and dead artists including Raphael, Titian and the Carracci. "
In later years when the great patrician families were more interested in selling than in displaying their pictures, the exhibitions seem to have become far more commercial.
Thus 212 pictures, old and modern, were exhibited in 1736, a catalogue was issued, and there were hopes that the Pope would make a bid.
There was one more regular art exhibition which began much later in the century than those so far considered. This was held in the beautiful cloisters of S. Salvatore in
Lauro, a church that was bought for the Marchigian colony in Rome by Cardinal
Azzolini in 1669. Soon afterwards the members of this group began to celebrate the anniversary of the arrival of the Holy House in Loreto on 10 December with elaborate celebrations which included concerts and a picture exhibition. We know that in the
Holy Year of 1675, so rich in exhibitions, the one at S. Salvatore in Lauro was said to equal any held in Rome. But here too the intention was to decorate the church and glorify the lenders—often families from the Marche—rather than provide publicity for the painters. Despite this, the exhibitions in S. Salvatore in Lauro were organised far more professionally than any of the others. As from 1682 the painter Giuseppe
Ghezzi, life secretary of the Accademia di S. Luca and himself from Ascoli Piceno, was in charge of the arrangements and he went to great trouble to perfect them. Families prepared to lend had to be approached in good time; reliable porters had to be hired for the transport and soldiers employed on 24-hour guard duty over the 10 and 11 December, during which days the paintings remained on view; adequate lighting had to be arranged and criticisms of the public taken into account. Pride of place was always given to a representation of the Madonna, but every kind of painting was included in the exhibition. Ghezzi recommended five or six large canvases and about 200 smaller ones as the ideal to be aimed at, but numbers obviously varied from year to year.
Quite soon considerable prestige attached to creating a striking effect, and—as so often in Rome—rivalries between the various owners came powerfully to the fore. '
Thus in 1697 Prince Pio agreed to lend his pictures entirely at his own expense—on condition that his alone were shown. They included a number of Venetian old masters and were all hung together under the arcades of the loggia. But in order to satisfy other collectors who also wanted to display their treasures further pictures were hung separately in the upper gallery of the cloisters. The occasion turned into a brilliant social ceremony with a sermon from the preacher of St Peter’s and a great assembly of cardinals. We find a similar situation in 1708 when the Marchese Ruspoli at first

[Page 129]
insisted that only his 194 pictures should be exhibited but finally agreed to Ghezzi’s tactful suggestion that Monsignor Olivieri be allowed to hang 23 of his.
In all these exhibitions old masters were given far greater prominence than contemporary work and many pictures were repeatedly shown year after year. Sometimes, however, they provided an opportunity for the public to see current painting of a kind that would not normally be easily accessible. Thus Cardinal Ottoboni showed pictures by Trevisani whom he assiduously employed, and in 1707 Cardinal Grimani, in a sit of patriotic enthusiasm, sent in 23 ‘historié di maniera veneziana’ by Antonio Molinari who, although he had died 25 years earlier, was still quite unknown to Roman collectors. At other times the exhibition was used for more directly propagandist purposes.
In 1704, for instance, the Pope wished to make better known the victories won by
King John of Poland and encouraged his widow to lend a series of portraits and battle pictures for this purpose.
Thus by the end of the century there were four regular exhibitions in Rome each year—in March, July, August and December—quite apart from a large number of occasional ones arranged for special events and casual affairs spontaneously organised by a particular patron or artist. But none of the regular exhibitions had as its primary.aim the opportunity for a painter to show new work, and some deliberately excluded this. Essentially all of them made use of pictures, as of tapestries and banners, for decorative purposes. From the strictly artistic point of view it is probable therefore that the more informal showings were the most fruitful and that it was only gradually that artists managed to turn to their own purposes what had been designed as a religious function. For this reason the importance of regular patronage, and the need to exhibit work on a permanent basis by painting altarpieces in the more frequented churches, were comparatively little affected by seventeenth-century exhibitions.
None the less, the exhibitions cannot be considered in isolation. We must remember also the increasing prevalence of dealers as Rome became more easily accessible to travellers of all kinds, including Protestants; the ambitions of foreign rulers and patrons who wanted artists from their own countries to record the glories of Rome and reproduce for them the triumphs of Italian painting; the consequent settling in Rome of different national colonies of artists who often drew attention to themselves by their strange dress and still stranger customs. When all this is taken into account it will be appreciated that exhibitions were among a number of factors that introduced into Rome the art of alien cultures often bearing little organic relationship to conditions in the city.
Still more significant, exhibitions helped to make painting a far more ‘public’ business than it had ever been before. Pictures were readily available and within the reach of everybody: no longer confined to the altar or to the family palace, they now hung outside the church on ceremonial occasions, were propped up against the walls of cloisters on specified days of the year, enticed the public into the dealer’s shop, were bought, sold, exchanged, criticised, argued about. The artists themselves were more visible than they had been: sketching in the ruins or among the great modern buildings that sprang up everywhere and sketching each other so doing; making rapid impressions

[Page 130]
of the colourful life that they saw around them to send back to their northern homes, reeling back drunk after the traditional ceremony of enrolling a new member into the bentveughels. All this was leading to a growing appreciation of pictures as pictures rather than as exclusively the records of some higher truth; a body of connoisseurs was coming into being prepared to judge pictures on their aesthetic merits, and consequently the subject-matter of painting was losing its old primaeval importance. This attitude is one that only generally becomes apparent in the eighteenth century and that has been pushed to its extreme limits in our own day; but it is already noticeable in a patron such as Vincenzo Giustiniani and is enshrined in Caravaggio’s comment to him ‘that it was as hard work to paint good pictures of flowers as of figures’.1 It is an attitude that inevitably led to the triumph during the early years of the seventeenth century of still-life painting, landscapes and a whole range of subjects which had hitherto not been treated as worth attention in their own right. As an explanation of the main currents of painting during the century it is fully as important as the far more publicised counterattacks of those theorists who wished to enforce a rigid hierarchy of suitable subject matter on the artist.
At the same time, and partly owing to these very circumstances, a very wide and hitherto unimportant range of the general public was beginning to take an interest in painting and consequently to influence its development. We frequently come across references to these anonymous patrons in the artistic literature of the seventeenth century. Giulio Mancini was among the first to address them. In his Treatise he devoted a small section to the ‘rules for buying, hanging and preserving pictures’.2 Carefully distinguishing between the rich and the aristocratic on the one hand and the ‘huomini di stato mediocre e di stato basso’ on the other, he pointed out that the latter would not be in a position to distribute their largesse very freely. If they had to bargain with the painter over theprice, they should find out how long the work took him and estimate what his daily earnings should be ‘by comparison with the pay of a craftsman engaged on similar work’. They were only likely to have two rooms available for hanging pictures—the bedroom and the reception room. Devotional works should be placed in the former; ‘cheerful and profane’ ones in the latter.
But what were the actual pictures owned by this submerged public? We can safely assume that the great majority would today be of little interest to the art historian:
devotional pictures, above all, mass produced in the studios of successful painters or
" copied from the most influential altarpieces. We often hear of young artists being employed on such work when they first came to Rome, and no doubt this was the public with which they bargained for their living. If we move rather higher up the social scale—to the clergy, traders, doctors and lawyers outside the ruling circles—we are no better informed, but certain possibilities suggest themselves. Can it have been for men such as these that Sassoferrato painted his restrained and archaising devotional pictures which were long taken to be by some follower of Raphael (Plate 21b)? A

[Page 131]
prolific painter, unrecorded by his contemporaries, he came to Rome from his native
Marche some time during the reign of Urban VIII. There he confined himself almost exclusively to pictures of tire Holy Family, basing himself on three or four prototypes which he varied from time to time. His models were Raphael, Annibale Carracci and
Domenichino at his most austere, and his simple pictures, which at their best are very beautiful, appear to be almost polemical in their opposition to the current Baroque style.
At the beginning of his career he enjoyed a certain success. In 1641 the priests of the Calabrian national church dedicated to S. Francesco da Paola commissioned from him a painting of the titular saint kneeling in adoration while the Virgin and Child appears on the clouds holding an emblem of charity. As the same priests also employed their fellow-Calabrian Francesco Cozza on an altar painting it was probably he who recommended Sassoferrato, for both had been pupils of Domenichino and were almost certainly associated.1 Two years later what must have been an especially congenial task led to his masterpiece. The Dominicans of Santa Sabina, anxious to raise money, had decided to sell a Raphael Holy Family in their possession to Vincenzo Giustiniani, who offered 2000 scudi. When negotiations fell through in 163 6 they rashly gave it to
Cardinal Antonio Barberini on the understanding that he would make it worth their while. The Cardinal gratefully took the picture and regarded the matter as closed. Only in 1643 did the Princess of Rossano, wife of Pope Innocent X’s nephew Camillo
Pamftli, decide to have it replaced by a Virgin and Child holding Rosaries with Saints
Catherine and Dominic for which she paid Sassoferrato a hundred scudi (Plate 21 a).2
Despite its great beauty the picture evidently did not please, for thereafter Sassoferrato’s public commissions became exceedingly rare. He was not ignored by the grander patrons since the odd work by him turns up in many patrician collections, though probably acquired towards the end of his life when classicism and Raphael were once again the supreme and unchallenged guides. He drew and painted many clerics, including an occasional cardinal and governor of some of the papal states.3 But the great bulk of his work was for unknown patrons, and this fact, together with its unfashionable style and limited range of subject-matter, strongly suggests that Sassoferrato was principally employed by the professional community of which we know so little—men like Giacinto GigE, minor civil servant and amateur poet, who kept a detailed diary diEgently recording the great religious festivals and miraculous occurrences which were the most striking aspects of Baroque Rome to those outside the grander circles of society.4

**Footnotes:**
1 Pascoli, I, p. 65, and Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 357.
2 Jan Niceo Eritreo, II, pp. 127-30. There is a print by Giovanni Battista Mercati after Correggio’s Marriage o f St Catherine dedicated to Lelio Guidiccioni with an inscription recording his love of painting.
3 Missirini, pp. 126 and 122.
5 Missirini, p. 96. In the Archives of the Accademia di S. Luca (Filza 166, n. 68 c. 22r) is a ‘Nota delli Rivenditori di quadri chc devono pagare alia Chiesa di S. Luca per 1636.’ This includes dealers in the Piazza Navona, Campo Marzio, Trastevere and other parts of Rome.
6 Hoogewerff, 1913, p. 104. Many guidebooks refer to the Piazza Navona in this connection. In 1645 Evelyn (Vol. 2, p. 368) ‘spent an Afternoone in Piazza Navona, as well to see what Antiquities I could purchase among the people, who hold Mercat there for Medaills, Pictures, & such Curiosities, as to heare the Mountebanks prate, & debate their Medicines’.
7 Giovanni Stefano Roccatagliata, who was in close touch with Poussin and who 'old pictures to Valguarnera, was a Genoese—Bertolotti: Artisti subalpini, p. 185. So too was Antonio Maria Visconti, whose shop was near the Albergo del Moretto and who in 1699 denounced the theft of eleven pictures— ibid., p. 199. And see the following note.
1 For Pellegrino Peri and his dealings with Gaulli see Pascoli, I, p. 198. In 1666 he was attacked by Giovanni Andrea Carlone, who refused to pay him back a loan. In 1681 he denounced the robbery of two pictures by Filippo Lauri and Giovanni Perusini which had been stolen from his shop—Bertolotti: Artisti subalpini, p. 199.
2 Vaes, 1925, pp. 137-247.
3 Passeri, p. 301. The whole question is discussed at some length in Chapter 6.
4 De Dominici, IV, p. 19.
5 Pascoli, I, p. 66.
6 Letter from Cornelius de Stael to Don Antonio Ruffo dated 9 June 1663 published by V. Russo, p; 170.
1 Certainly there are no cases, other than those referred to here, of distinguished artists working systematically for dealers. This should be compared with the situation in contemporary Holland—Martin, 1907.
2 For Ferrante Carlo see above all the evidence quoted by Miss Jane Costello. Dumesnil in 1853 devoted a chapter to Carlo, but this does little more than summarise the many letters to him published by Bottari, I. Like all writers before Miss Costello, he was unaware of Carlo’s activities as a ‘dealer’ and considers him purely as a patron. There is further information in Borzelli, 1910, about his contacts with Cassiano dal Pozzo which are documented in letters now in the Montpellier Library. Some most interesting letters from Ludovico Carracci to Carlo have been published by Giorgio Nicodemi, 1935, who also refers to other sources for his career.
3 Fraschetti, p. 71, publishes an avviso of 1637 which refers to Carlo as a ‘nemico’ of Bernini ‘et che vorrebbe vederlo esterminato’.
4 The main and most vivid source for Mancini’s life is Jan Niceo Eritreo, II, pp. 79-82. See also the critical edition of his works, 1956.
1 See Monconys’ Journal des Voyages, 2eme partie, p. 439, for Simonelli’s contacts with artists in 1664. Some information about his own collecting is given in Bellori’s Nota dei Musei, which says that he owned a ‘Studio di disegni li più eccellenti di Giulio Romano, di Polidoro, di Annibaie Carracci, & de’migliori Artefici, con vario museo d’intagli, gemme, antichità, e cose peregrine, siccome anche di varie pitture eccellenti’.
1 See Haskell, in Studi Secenteschi, i960, for the whole section on exhibitions with full references.
1 Bottari, VI, p. 123.
1 Mancini, I, p. 139.
1 Pollak, I, 1927, p. 129. 2 Berthier, p. 315.
3 Blunt and Cooke, pp. 102 if In the Galleria N azionale di Arte Antica in Rome is a signed portrait of Monsignor Ottaviano Prati, who at different times was Governor of Benevento and Viterbo-Moroni, LXI, p. 216, and CH, p. 363. 4 Gigli passim.