# 05 CHP-5 sec iv

- iv -
Some years earlier another opponent with very mixed motives had joined the virulent onslaught. Salvator Rosa’s career was confused with and bedevilled by the triumph of the bamboccianti from the very start. On his arrival in Rome in 1637 one of his first patrons had been the amateur dealer Niccolò Simonelli who also showed an interest in
Pieter van Laer.1 Driven from Rome not long after, partly through the hostility of the
' all powerful Bernini, he settled in Florence only to find there some of Michelangelo
Cerquozzi’s keenest admirers, above all the Corsini and Salviati families. Cerquozzi and Rosa were considered to be rivals as landscape painters2—an outrageous insult to
Salvator who looked upon himself as a serious painter of moral ‘histories’, only compelled to indulge in landscapes and battles because of the obtuseness of lais clients. Back in Rome in 1649 he found Cerquozzi more fashionable than ever. Unable to bear the situation, he launched into the attack.3 After enumerating the sort of subjects that were treated by the artist and his followers, he too showed that his real bitterness was reserved for their patrons: ‘And these pictures are so much admired that they can be found magnificently framed in the apartments of the great.’ That was the real insult. But still the bamboccianti pursued Rosa. No sooner was Cerquozzi safely dead in March 1660 than he found himself having to buy a copy of a Van Laer to gratify his closest friend
Giambattista Ricciardi.4
Rosa’s career was, in fact, a tribute to the good judgement of a wide variety of
Roman connoisseurs who compelled him to stick to the small romantic landscapes which show his true genius. But to him it appeared very different. He was desperately anxious, and even prepared to humiliate himself, to be given some great public commission and it is somewhat surprising that he so dismally failed.5 Far worse painters than he were given the chance, and his bitter quarrels with the Accademia di S. Luca would not have deterred a really authoritative cardinal. However, there is little doubt that
Rosa wished above all to find some Cassiano dal Pozzo or Camillo Massimi to foster what he considered to be his special talent—the painting of tragic and complex allegories and histories. Though he referred to him only once in passing, he seems to have visualised himself as a Poussin working for a cultivated élite, and curiously enough when settled in Italy at the end of the century Lord Shaftesbury drew a parallel between these two ‘honest moral men’ who had, so he heard from ‘old virtuosos and painters’, been good friends.6 But Rosa never succeeded in his ambition. In Florence he did indeed find himself at the centre osa brilliant society where his talents for conversation, music,

[Page 143]
poetry and mime were as much admired as his painting, and it is true that in Rome also he fascinated a number of highly placed churchmen, but never in the way that he really wanted. ‘I know that as a Stoic you would mock all this,’ he wrote to a friend, describing some social success, ‘but what is one to do? He who cannot have the roast meat must needs satisfy himself with the aroma.’1 With its combination of bitterness, assumed self-depreciation and homely proverb the phrase is characteristic. So too is the allusion to Stoicism. All over Europe this philosophy had been gaining ground ever since the late sixteenth century until for some daring thinkers it virtually replaced
Christianity as a guiding creed. Even when not so intense it still coloured the ethics and imagery of men of action and artists alike. With its proud disdain for the vicissitudes of fortune it was a philosophy well suited to the storm-tossed seventeenth century. And as men are more likely to look to their beliefs for support in misfortune than for selfcontrol in triumph, it particularly appealed to those who felt that the world had treated them badly or that its more ostentatious prizes were not for them. Plutarch and Seneca were ransacked for quotations, and innumerable paintings recorded the deeds of the virtuous, iron-willed heroes of antiquity. Salvator Rosa, in particular, would passionately study the Stoics and search in their writings for themes for his pictures and prints.
But far from tapping a responsive chord in a public which doted on such stories, he would find that his potential clients only wanted his landscapes, small ones at that,
‘always they want my small landscapes, always, always, my small ones’.2 He did not make it easy for them. When the unfortunate prelate who was responsible for this outburst tactfully enquired about the price of a large picture, Rosa merely answered
‘a million’, and thus ended the discussion.3 In another fit of ill-temper he wrote: ‘I am delighted that these pictures of mine are going to the bad, so that people will forget that
I ever painted landscapes.’4 Of course they did not forget, for he was keenly and rightly admired. But always by the wrong people—-those who specialised in bambocciate, like the Conte Carpegna and the Marchese Teodoli, or those whose tastes were notoriously frivolous like the Duke of Modena who wrote to his agent in Rome asking for battles by Rosa and Borgognone, flower pictures by Mario ‘de Fiori’ and Cerquozzi, landscapes by Gaspard Poussin and fables by Pier Francesco Mola.5 Only rarely did the learned connoisseurs whom he hoped to impress with his frigid and rhetorical history paintings show any interest.
- His greatest patron in Rome was his banker, Carlo de’ Rossi, brother of the famous composer Luigi and himself a talented musician.6 De’ Rossi paid him a regular 6 per cent, interest on the 4000 scudi that Rosa deposited with him, but in "1667 the two men quarrelled bitterly—‘he has treated me very meanly and showed little gratitude’,

[Page 144]
claimed the artist.1 Before that, however, De’ Rossi had assembled what amounted to a private museum of Rosa’s works consisting of a large gallery and several small rooms.2
In these he hung allegorical and history paintings such as the Prometheus, La Fortuna and above all the artist’s masterpiece, Regulus killed by the Carthaginians (Plate 23b), in which
Rosa’s grudging obligation to the bamboccianti and instinctive love of the picturesque are raised to high, heroic tragedy through his study of the Stoic historians. De’ Rossi also obtained quantities of the smaller pictures which Rosa so affected to despise— battles, sea pieces, landscapes and weird scenes of witchcraft—and he combined his esteem for the artist with a shrewd sense of business by filling the family chapel in the
Madonna di Montesanto with altarpieces which Rosa painted without charge so as to make at least one appearance in public.3
Yet De’ Rossi, for all his friendship, was no Dal Pozzo. There is no evidence to suggest that he ever gave Salvator Rosa the encouragement and intellectual stimulus which he clearly wanted despite his show of bravado. To find such a patron Rosa had to turn to Florence, the home of his closest friend the poet Giambattista Ricciardi. For him he went on painting a number of pictures long after he had settled in Rome and to him he looked for constant advice: ‘if you happen to get hold of some lively story involving a soldier with a woman I would be very grateful...’, he wrote on one occasion.4
Or again, in a revealing letter: ‘Remember that I want something new with only a few figures. And as the canvas is a tall one, it would not matter if there had to be a figure in the air above the clouds or something. I had wondered (if you thought so too) whether that image in Virgil’s Georgies might not be suitable: when Justice departs from the Earth and leaves her sword and scales with some shepherds. Do please think about this; Rome has heard that I have the most original ideas, and so I must five up to this reputation as much as possible.’5
To Ricciardi too he disclosed those astonishing impressions of the landscapes he visited which showed how deeply felt and genuine was the romantic sentiment in his painting. The country, he wrote,6 ‘is such an extravagant mixture of the horrid and the tame [d’un misto cosi stravagante d’orrido e di domestico], of the flat and the precipitous, that the eye cannot hope to find anything more pleasing. I can swear to you that the colours of one of those mountains are far more beautiful than everything I have seen under the Tuscan sky. Your Verrucola (which I used to think had a certain horrid quality) I will in suture call a garden by comparison with the mountains I have crossed.
Good God, how many times I wanted you with me, how many times I called to you to look at some solitary hermit sighted on the way—Fate alone knows how much they tempted me! We went to Ancona and Sirolo and on the way back to Assisi over and above the journey—all places of extraordinary fascination for a painting.

[Page 145]
‘At Terni (that is four miles off our road) I saw the famous waterfall of the Velino, the river of Rieti. It was enough to inspire the most exacting brain through its horrid beauty: the sight of a river hurtling down a half-mile mountain precipice and raising a column of foam fully as high. Believe me, nowhere there did I look or move without thinking of you... . .’
Would Ricciardi, in fact, have responded to Rosa’s precocious eighteenth-century enthusiasm? As his letters have not survived, we must accept the artist’s trust, but nothing in his frigid and pedantic literary work suggests that he was the sort of man to have any true appreciation of Rosa’s qualities. He was certainly a devoted and muchloved friend, but Rosa does not seem to have thought very highly of his artistic judgement: ‘the little picture which you consider to be Florentine seems to me to be Flemish, and the one which you damn I find the least bad’, he wrote on one of the rare occasions he ever discussed pictures other than his own.1 And, in any case, Ricciardi lived in a different town and could not therefore give him the personal patronage he wanted.
Thus Rosa, despite his immense, though fitful, artistic and social success, was rather an isolated figure, proud and melancholic though buoyant, fiercely independent and contemptuous of most of his fellow-artists, a failed intellectual painter whom no one would take seriously and who was all too frequently confused with the bamhoccianti— the very artists who most consistently rejected the elevated moral and poetic qualities to which he so avidly aspired. It was in these circumstances that he found it necessary to launch the onslaught on conventional patronage which has already been described: to use every method open to him to impose the image of an intensely serious artist of a wholly new kind.2 Failing to appeal to a select clientèle of fastidious tastes, he was paradoxically forced to look beyond even the outer circles of contemporary patronage, and thus, as Passeri points out in commenting on his situation, ‘by one of those strange and unavoidable accidents that intervene in the affairs of this world, his pictures could be seen not only in many houses belonging to gentlemen and princes but also in those owned by “persone di mediocre stato” ’.3 It can scarcely have comforted this most disdainful of artists to know that such pictures must have been of a higher quality than any that had yet been seen in such humble dwellings, but perhaps, like Luca Giordano,
‘he used three brushes—one of gold to satisfy the nobility, one of silver for private citizens, and one of copper for the populace’.4

**Footnotes:**
1 Letter to Ricciardi of 9 October 1666—Limentani, 1950, p. 138.
2 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 581. Rosa referred to himself as a Stoic in a letter to Ricciardi dated 27 May 1651—Limentani, 1950, p. 79.
3 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 581.
4 In 1666—de Rinaldis, 1939, p. 191.
5 A. Venturi, pp. 264-5.
6 Limentani, 1950, p. 13 9.
1 De Rinaldis, 1939, p. 199.
2 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 570. There is also a reference to De’ Rossi’s collection in Bellori’s Nota de Musei. 3 ibid. p. 569. The paintings are now at Chantilly...
4 De Rinaldis, 1939, p. 17—Letter of 24 April 1651.
5 ibid., p. 19—Letter of 12 May 1Ó51.
6 Bottari, I, p. 450. Letter of 13 May 1662.
1 De Rinaldis, 1939, p. 164—Letter ofZI May 1664.
2 See Chapter I.
3 Passeri, p. 396.
4 De Dominici, IV, p. 186.