# CHP-5



--- [Page 1] ---

Chapter 5
THE WIDER PUBLIC
- i -
POUSSIN became one of the leading painters in Rome. Yet he never worked in
fresco, was hardly ever employed by the Pope, only once or twice painted an
altarpiece.1 Such was now the power of the independent patron to make the reputation
of an artist and to guide his development. Deliberately confining himself to a restricted
circle of scholars and humanists, he soon moved from the generalised battle pictures
with which he had been forced to begin his career to a more and more complex inter­
pretation of religion and mythology, often as difficult to understand as the great paint­
ings of the Florentine Renaissance produced in somewhat similar circumstances nearly
two hundred years earlier. The times were favourable. Never was Rome so closely
aligned to French policy and culture as during the twenty-odd years of Urban VIII’s
pontificate. Not for many generations had there been such a circle of intellectually
minded connoisseurs, interested in all the latest developments in science and aesthetics,
ready to encourage complex imagery and a more aristocratically restrained form of
artistic expression than that which filled the churches and palaces of the great. Yet
independent patrons of this kind were not the only ones who broke down the monopoly
of Church and aristocracy in early seventeenth-century Rome. With the increasing
attraction of the city to tourists and growing economic uncertainties conditions of
patronage gradually loosened and we come across an ever larger number of professional
art dealers in direct contact with living painters.
Dealers at first played an important part only in the careers of young and unknown
artists. Every time we hear of them it is in connection with some painter newly arrived
in Rome, unable to fit at once into the established system. Such, for instance, was the
case of Caravaggio, who sold some of his early works to a French dealer called Valentin
and through him met the Cardinal del Monte2; or of the Spaniard Giuseppe Ribera,
who on his arrival in Rome ‘took to painting by the day for those who deal in pictures
- - with all the trials such work involves for young men’.3 Indeed, once an artist had made
his reputation there would be no question of his ever working again for a dealer unless
driven by the most acute distress. For they had a bad reputation both with painters and
with the public. We hear that they tried to keep the young Salvator Rosa away from
1 The Martyrdom of St Erasmus, now in the Vatican Gallery, is the only altarpiece that Poussin painted
for anltalianchurch—St Peter’s in 1628-9; for this, incidentally, he did make a preparatory modello (Ottawa).
There is a tradition that the Annunciation (National Gallery, London) comes from Pope Alexander Vil’s
chapel at Castel Gandolfo. As it is inscribed with his name this may well be correct, though the evidence
is not conclusive—see Blunt in Société Poussin, 1947, pp. 18-25.
2 Friedlaender, p. 101. 3 Mancini, I, p. 249.

--- [Page 2] ---

THE WIDER PUBLIC 121
direct contact with possible clients so that he would be forced to work exclusively for
them, and as early as 1635 Claude found himself compelled to keep a record of all his
paintings, as copies of his works were being sold ‘throughout Rome’ as originals.1 One
of the collectors who may well have been tricked by unscrupulous dealers of this kind
was Lelio Guidiccioni, a poet in the Barberini circle, who ‘burned with extraordinary
zeal and lust for pictures and spared no labour or expense in acquiring them’—only to
find that he had been landed with many a doubtful ‘Michelangelo’, ‘Raphael’ and
‘Perino del Vaga’.2
But quite apart from cases of dishonesty, it was felt that the whole business of
dealing in the liberal arts was degrading and somehow humiliating to the arts them­
selves. ‘It is serious, lamentable, indeed intolerable to everybody to see works destined
for the decoration of Sacred Temples or the splendour of noble palaces, exhibited in
shops or in the streets like cheap goods for sale’—so complained the Accademia di S.
Luca. For these reasons it forbade its own members to engage in dealing on pain of
expulsion.3 But the Accademia was ever on the lookout for new sources of income, and
in 1633 it managed to get papal authority to impose a special tax of ten scudi a year on
all art dealers. As might be expected this caused a good deal of trouble, and ensuing
controversies give us some insight into the situation.4
Dealers usually combined their businesses with some other activity on the fringes
of art such as selling colours or gilding. But—and this obviously accounts for much of
the resentment—they also included barbers, tailors, cobblers and so on.5 They were
prepared to sell both old masters and works specially commissioned from those unfor­
tunate enough to fall into their clutches. There were also sellers of rosaries and other
religious goods who dealt only in small devotional pictures. All of them were bitterly
hostile to the proposed tax and many succeeded in dodging it for years, although it was
not until 1669 that they managed to get it reduced. By then their numbers had grown
considerably and in 1674 there were at least a hundred, most of them installed around
the Piazza Navona.6 As in so many branches of European trade, the great majority
seem to have been Genoese, who naturally often dealt in the works of their compatriots.7
1 Pascoli, I, p. 65, and Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 357.
2 Jan Niceo Eritreo, II, pp. 127-30. There is a print by Giovanni Battista Mercati after Correggio’s
Marriage o f St Catherine dedicated to Lelio Guidiccioni with an inscription recording his love of painting.
3 Missirini, pp. 126 and 122.
4~Hoogewerff, 1913, p. 116, and 1935, pp. 189-203, with bibliography.
5 Missirini, p. 96. In the Archives of the Accademia di S. Luca (Filza 166, n. 68 c. 22r) is a ‘Nota
delli Rivenditori di quadri chc devono pagare alia Chiesa di S. Luca per 1636.’ This includes dealers in
the Piazza Navona, Campo Marzio, Trastevere and other parts of Rome.
6 Hoogewerff, 1913, p. 104. Many guidebooks refer to the Piazza Navona in this connection. In 1645
Evelyn (Vol. 2, p. 368) ‘spent an Afternoone in Piazza Navona, as well to see what Antiquities I could
purchase among the people, who hold Mercat there for Medaills, Pictures, & such Curiosities, as to heare
the Mountebanks prate, & debate their Medicines’.
7 Giovanni Stefano Roccatagliata, who was in close touch with Poussin and who 'old pictures to
Valguarnera, was a Genoese—Bertolotti: Artisti subalpini, p. 185. So too was Antonio Maria Visconti,
whose shop was near the Albergo del Moretto and who in 1699 denounced the theft of eleven pictures—
ibid., p. 199. And see the following note.

--- [Page 3] ---

122 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
We hear frequently of one Pellegrino Peri who lived near the statue of Pasquino during
the second half of the seventeenth century and who employed the young Gaulli on his
arrival in Rome, as well as Gian Andrea Carlone who refused to pay back a debt he
owed him.1 The Flemish were also prominent dealers. The artist Cornelius de Wael,
for instance, who left Genoa in 1657, engaged in extensive commercial activities and
had a large gallery of pictures which were evidently for sale. He dealt principally with
his own compatriots, both as regards artists and clients. Though he also owned early
works by Gaulli whom he must have known in Genoa as well as smaller pictures by
Italian genre, flower and battle painters, he played little part in the lives of the more
important artists.2
It was the financial turmoil that followed the pontificate of Urban VIII that
changed the whole situation and gave dealers their first large-scale opportunities. Artists
were left helpless by the policy of economic retrenchment pursued by Innocent X.
Large numbers had been attracted to Rome and their clientele was mainly Roman, built
up over the long and prosperous reign of Urban VIII. Now suddenly the market seemed
to crash. We get vivid accounts in contemporary biographies of what this meant to
artists at the time.3 Among other results more and more painters had to work for
dealers, many of whom exploited their distress to the full. Others apparently offered
generous terms. Thus we hear of one Pellegrino de Rossi who gave work to Mattia
Preti among a number of unemployed artists who were attracted by his kindness.4
Another factor that encouraged the rise of dealers was the increasing number of Italian
pictures which were being sent to France, Spain, England and other European countries
during the second half of the century. Foreigners who came to Rome for a short time
must certainly have found it easier to go to dealers than direct to the painter, who might
often be capricious and unreliable. Similarly dealers themselves sometimes took the
initiative in exporting works of art. Thus an innkeeper called Andrea Ottini used to get
Giacinto Brandi to settle his debts in pictures. He did so well out of this that he said
that if Brandi could be induced to work regularly for him he would close his inn and
take to the art trade. Without going as far as that, he still commissioned several works
from him and sent them to France.5
But in general such commissioning of pictures from artists was rare enough, for
as one dealer, Cornelius de Stael, explained to a client in 1663: ‘It’s very troublesome
to do business with these gentlemen [painters]. I find it much better to buy pictures
- - already painted than to commission new ones.’6 Professional dealers did play a significant
1 For Pellegrino Peri and his dealings with Gaulli see Pascoli, I, p. 198. In 1666 he was attacked by
Giovanni Andrea Carlone, who refused to pay him back a loan. In 1681 he denounced the robbery of
two pictures by Filippo Lauri and Giovanni Perusini which had been stolen from his shop—Bertolotti:
Artisti subalpini, p. 199.
2 Vaes, 1925, pp. 137-247.
3 Passeri, p. 301. The whole question is discussed at some length in Chapter 6.
4 De Dominici, IV, p. 19.
5 Pascoli, I, p. 66.
6 Letter from Cornelius de Stael to Don Antonio Ruffo dated 9 June 1663 published by V. Russo,
p; 170.

--- [Page 4] ---

THE WIDER PUBLIC 123
part in breaking down the tight relationship between artist and patron, but although we
hear more and more of them as the years go by, it is very doubtful whether, in the
seventeenth century, they ever ventured much beyond the relatively unknown painter.1
However, alongside dealers of this kind were figures more difficult to define—
those marchands-amateurs whose activities even today are often not easily determined and
who turn up again and again in any history of patronage. This type of dealer makes his
first appearance cautiously, so cautiously that for a long time we fail to notice him. Thus
Ferrante Carlo, born in Parma in 1578, was a most cultivated lawyer and poet who
was employed as secretary first by Cardinal Sfondrato and then by Cardinal Borghese,
in whose palace he lived.2 Of a rather combative temperament, he took part in many
of the literary and artistic quarrels of the day and managed to become embroiled with
the two greatest favourites of the early seventeenth century—first the poet Marino and
then Bernini whom he ‘wished to see exterminated’ because of some precarious
alterations the architect had made in the structure of St Peter’s.3 His real passion was for
pictures, and although contemporaries were doubtful about his taste and understanding,
he was in touch with Cassiano dal Pozzo and many leading artists. His special favourites
were the Bolognese and Giovanni Lanfranco from his native Parma. He befriended and
commissioned works from all of these and owned a notable collection. But his passion
was not wholly disinterested as we gather from an episode in 1631 when the Sicilian
adventurer Don Fabrizio Valguarnera called on Ferrante Carlo with a few friends. For
a time they talked in generalities about the qualities of the various painters represented
on his walls and then Valguarnera asked if Carlo was prepared ‘to deprive himself of
some of his pictures’. The answer was immediate: T agreed,’ said Carlo when describing
the incident later, ‘as long as I received an honourable deal.’ We recognise the type.
Beneath the Oriental courtesies there must have been some shrewd bargaining.
Another strange sort of dealer, even better placed for taking advantage of his
connections, was the Pope’s doctor Giulio Mancini.4 Like many a man in such a situation
his inflated reputation as a great healer allowed him a degree of freedom unimaginable
to ordinary citizens. A virtually self-confessed atheist, he deliberately encouraged his
friends to eat meat during Lent and carried on a notorious affair with a married woman
whose criminal sons he successfully saved from justice. As a doctor he was said to be
1 Certainly there are no cases, other than those referred to here, of distinguished artists working
systematically for dealers. This should be compared with the situation in contemporary Holland—Martin,
1907.^
2 For Ferrante Carlo see above all the evidence quoted by Miss Jane Costello. Dumesnil in 1853
devoted a chapter to Carlo, but this does little more than summarise the many letters to him published
by Bottari, I. Like all writers before Miss Costello, he was unaware of Carlo’s activities as a ‘dealer’ and
considers him purely as a patron. There is further information in Borzelli, 1910, about his contacts with
Cassiano dal Pozzo which are documented in letters now in the Montpellier Library. Some most interest­
ing letters from Ludovico Carracci to Carlo have been published by Giorgio Nicodemi, 1935, who also
refers to other sources for his career.
3 Fraschetti, p. 71, publishes an avviso of 1637 which refers to Carlo as a ‘nemico’ of Bernini ‘et che
vorrebbe vederlo esterminato’.
4 The main and most vivid source for Mancini’s life is Jan Niceo Eritreo, II, pp. 79-82. See also the
critical edition of his works, 1956.

--- [Page 5] ---

124 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
efficient but brusque and he cunningly made use of his medical gifts to further his very
real artistic interests. For when visiting his distinguished and fashionable patients he
would suggest at the critical moment that some of their pictures would make an accept­
able gift. Few felt like refusing just then, and from such opportunities he derived decisive
advantages over all rival dealers and the knowledge needed to write a learned and most
valuable artistic Treatise.
A third and almost equally influential figure who indulged in a certain amount of
unofficial dealing was Niccolò Simonelli.1 An obviously efficient administrator, he
served under various cardinals before ending up in charge of the Chigi household during
the papacy of Alexander VII. He had some reputation as a connoisseur and liked to give
advice on artistic matters. He assembled a notable collection of drawings by Giulio
Romano, Polidoro da Caravaggio and Annibale Carracci, his special favourite, as well
as paintings, antiquities and cameos. He was clearly a man of independent and cultivated
taste, for he was in very close touch with a number of interesting artists outside the
main stream of fashion—Salvator Rosa whom he helped to launch, Pietro Testa to
whom he lent money, Castiglione whose publisher dedicated to him a fine print of
Diogenes searching in vain for one honest man. Simonelli too took advantage of
these contacts though he was obviously a much more respectable figure than Mancini.
When the French traveller Monsieur de Monconys visited Rome in 1664 it was Simon­
elli who took him round the studios, introduced him to Poussin and Claude and sold
him the odd picture. No doubt he did the same for other visitors.
All three figures, Carlo, Mancini and Simonelli, thus had many features in common.
All enjoyed distinguished careers in the clerical bureaucracy of the mid-seventeenth
century without themselves being in the Church, and all were friends and patrons of
many of the leading artists of their day. But though they were prepared to use these
1 See Monconys’ Journal des Voyages, 2eme partie, p. 439, for Simonelli’s contacts with artists in
1664. Some information about his own collecting is given in Bellori’s Nota dei Musei, which says that he
owned a ‘Studio di disegni li più eccellenti di Giulio Romano, di Polidoro, di Annibaie Carracci, &
de’migliori Artefici, con vario museo d’intagli, gemme, antichità, e cose peregrine, siccome anche di
varie pitture eccellenti’.
Passeri, p. 388, who refers to his relations with Salvator Rosa, says that Simonelli ‘stava in credito
d’intendente’ and there are many references to him in Rosa’s letters.
Luigi Scaramuccia dedicated a print to him of Venus and Adonis on which he writes that Simonelli
was ‘inamorato dell’Opere dei Carracci’. On the back of a drawing by Pietro Testa at Windsor is a letter
from the artist to Simonelli which seems to show that he owed him money—Blunt and Cooke, i960,
" p. 115.
The occasional fact about his career in the Chigi household can be traced in that family’s archives—
Golzio, 1939, p. 155. The suggestion that his outlook on the world was not wholly conformist comes
from Castiglione’s print of Diogenes with its strange dedication from the publisher: ‘Al Sig: Nicolo
Simonelli Mio Sig.re—Quel Diogene Cinico che con tanta gloria serba piu vive che mai le sue memorie
baldanzoso risorge al mondo co delineamenti del Celebre Castiglioni e perche so quanto ella l’imiti ne
suoi virtuosi Costumi e particolarmente nel cercar con la lanterna gli uomini ho giudicato che il dedicarlo
a lei sara un accoppiamento felicissimo e che in altro non discordaranno salvo che esso potè con tanta
severità disprezzare i favori d’un Alessandro e V.S. per superarlo ne gli atti della benignità sapra con
cortesissimo animo gradire gli Ossequij della mia devotione la quale vivam. te la riverisco Di V.S. Aff.mo
Amico e Servitore G.D.R. [Gian Domenico Rossi] D.D.D.’

--- [Page 6] ---

THE WIDER PUBLIC 125
advantages, shrewdly yet discreetly, to deal in pictures, to call them professional dealers
would not only have bitterly offended them but would also give a wholly wrong
impression.
-iiFar more effective than any kind of dealer in bringing the artist into contact with a
wider public was the gradual extension of art exhibitions.1 The principal occasions for
these were provided by the many saints’ days and processions which were such a feature
of seventeenth-century life. The feast of Corpus Domini above all was associated with
the display of pictures, but it certainly had no monopoly. No exact spot seems to have
been indicated and artists probably exhibited indiscriminately with other craftsmen or
merchants showing their wares. Obviously no artist of established reputation would ever
think of lowering his dignity in this way, and those that we- generally come across are
minor specialists in landscape and genre and above all painters newly arrived in Rome
or returning after a long absence. For such men exhibitions seem to have been useful
and to have attracted connoisseurs of standing. They also inspired other artists: we hear
of a young peasant boy who decided to take up painting as the result of seeing a stall
covered with pictures at the fair of Sinigaglia, and Claude is supposed to have seen
landscapes by the Flemish artist Goffredo Wals at an exhibition in Rome and to have
been so struck with them that he went to study under him in Naples—a move which
played a decisive part in his career. And another exhibition—though very different in
aim and organisation—was actually arranged under pressure from the painters in Rome.
In 1607 the Duke of Mantua’s agent was forced to satisfy them by putting on view
Caravaggio’s Death of the Virgin which he had just bought for the Duke on Rubens’s
advice—an occasion which was apparently attended by all the leading artists, who thus
provided striking evidence of their growing influence and emancipation.
More organised exhibitions were sometimes held on 24 August by the Bergamasque
community in Rome to celebrate the feast day of their patron saint, St Bartholomew.
These took place in the courtyard of the church of S. Bartolomeo and were paid for
by the Guardiano. As in all Roman exhibitions of this kind, the occasion served primarily
to put on a spectacular decorative show in honour of the saint and his devotees. The
façade of the church was hung with tapestries, as were the houses round about, and an
observer confessed that it was hard to decide which was the more impressive: the
general-effect created by the hangings outside or the pictures spread round the inner
courtyard. It is not certain when the exhibitions began, but they were certainly flourish­
ing by 1650. S. Bartolomeo all’Isola arranged exhibitions for the saint’s name day, but
they were less important. Despite their devotional purpose the exhibitions certainly
provided artists with the opportunity to display their works and were far more dignified
1 See Haskell, in Studi Secenteschi, i960, for the whole section on exhibitions with full references.
For the exhibitions at S. Salvatore in Lauro I have made extensive use of the papers of Giuseppe Ghezzi
now in the Museo di Roma.

--- [Page 7] ---

126 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
occasions than the casual saints’ day fairs. They attracted the attention of potential buyers,
but it seems certain that here, as in all these exhibitions, purchases could not be made
on the spot.
The most famous and well attended of all the regular exhibitions in seventeenth­
century Rome was the one held in the Pantheon each year on 19 March to celebrate
the feast day of St Joseph. This was organised by the Congregazione dei Virtuosi, a
. confraternity consisting largely of artists which had been founded in 1543. Created in
the characteristic Counter Reformation atmosphere that prevailed at the time, its main
purpose was to promote good works in the form of charity and so on. As a secondary
aim it planned to make use of the fine arts to glorify religion. These objectives were
responsible for the nature and scope of the exhibitions which were certainly not designed
to serve the artist’s desire for recognition and were at first rarely so used. They probably
began early in the seventeenth century and came to an end some time before 17Ó4.
Each artist could submit one picture and a selection was made by the members of the
Congregazione. The pictures chosen were then arranged under the colonnade of the
portico, while above the balustrade was hung a large Dream of St Joseph and probably
tapestries. Both old masters and contemporary works were shown.
Quite soon artists began to make use of the Pantheon exhibitions in order to attract
attention to themselves. In 1650, for instance, Velasquez, then on his second visit to
Rome, showed the portrait of his servant Pareja which understandably caused a sensa­
tion. As the great Spanish artist was already a member both of the Congregazione dei
Virtuosi and of the Accademia di S. Luca, and as he had already been commissioned
to paint his famous portrait of Pope Innocent X, he probably wished to make his name
known to an even wider public. In this aim he was certainly successful and it is all the
more surprising that we hear so little of other artists taking advantage of the opportunity.
In the seventeenth century by far the most conspicuous of those who did so was Salvator
Rosa, who exhibited whenever possible. He was engaged in a running fight with the
critics, he loved publicity and he was therefore determined that every year the public
should see something new by him: ‘The important thing’, he wrote before the exhibi­
tion of 1651, ‘is that until now no one except Simonelli has seen the picture, as I have
always kept it shut up in a special room.’
For Salvator Rosa, as for Velasquez, exhibiting at the Pantheon was exceedingly
useful. ‘Last week’, he wrote in 1652, ‘I turned down the chance of going to Sweden—it
all sprung from the applause I won from the last picture I exhibited in S. Gioseppe in
Rotonda.’ In fact, the painter’s main intention was to increase his reputation rather than
bring in immediate cash, for pictures were not sold on the spot and admirers waited for
the artist to take his canvas home before making an offer.
Some still saw the occasion primarily as a means for paying homage to St Joseph.
When making his will in 1654, the Flemish painter Jan Miei left 300 scudi to the Con­
gregazione (to which he had belonged since 1Ó50) on condition that a yearly mass was
sung for his soul ‘and that the brethren be obliged to celebrate every year the feast of
the glorious St Joseph by having the portico of the Madonna of the Rotonda decorated

--- [Page 8] ---

THE WIDER PUBLIC 127
with pictures, as is and has been done each year’. But although the main purpose of the
exhibition was religious, the earliest records we have make it clear that devotional
pictures were not insisted on and that portraits and pagan history paintings were often
among those shown. Indeed, at the exhibition of 1680 the authorities ordered the police
to seize two of the pictures on the grounds that they were indecent. We need not take
the charge too seriously—a wave of puritanism swept through Rome that year and in
any case among those who sprang to the defence of the offending pictures was a cardinal.
The other great annual exhibition held in Rome took place in the cloisters of S.
Giovanni Decollate on 29 August, the saint’s day. The circumstances were somewhat
different. It was held under the auspices of the leading patrician families and evidently
redounded to their credit at least as much as to that of the artists represented. It is recorded
as a regular institution as early as 1620, but there are traces of it some twenty years
previously. In 1603 Orazio Gentileschi explained to the judge during the course of a
trial that there was a good deal of rivalry among the artists at work in Rome. ‘For
instance,’ he went on, ‘when I had placed a picture of the Archangel Michael at S.
Giovanni de’ Fiorentini, he [Giovanni Baglione] competed with me by putting a
picture just opposite it. And this picture which was called Divine Love he had painted
in competition with Michelangelo da Caravaggio’s Earthly Love.’ But though painters
might look upon the exhibition in this light, it is most unlikely that this was the sort of
purpose it was intended to serve. Almost certainly the pictures were designed to decor­
ate the church as part of the celebrations in honour of the saint. Salvator Rosa, however,
made full use of the exhibition to show his work to the public, and much of our
information about it is derived from him and dates from rather later in the century.
In 1662 it fell to the Sacchetti to organise the exhibition. Naturally, writes Rosa,
pride of place was given to Pietro da Cortona, the family painter. But as the Sacchetti
still had great influence with the Roman aristocracy they were also able to obtain the
loan of old masters from many of the most famous galleries of the city. Six years later
the Rospigliosi were responsible and they challenged all previous patrons by the lavish­
ness of the display they organised. For Camillo Rospigliosi was the Pope’s brother, and
he and his four sons had just been admitted as novices to the Compagnia della Miseri­
cordia which administered the church. The whole façade, the cemetery, the piazza and
even the adjoining street were draped with rare and precious tapestries, silver and
magnificent pictures. Owners of private galleries willingly lent their masterpieces,
whereas before they had always been reluctant to do so because, so an avviso informs us,
the papal nephews of the day found some pretext or other for laying hands on them.
In particular Queen Christina lent some of her most famous pictures. The Rospigliosi
decided that only old masters should be shown and that all contemporary work should
be excluded. But this resolution merely encouraged Rosa to challenge it. Though,
because of the spectacular competition he was forced to face, he called the occasion the
‘Valley of Jehoshaphat’, he managed—alone among living artists—to get two of his
pictures exhibited. It may well have been, therefore, in this year that his band of sup­
porters went round Rome asking people: ‘Have you seen the Titian, the Correggio,

--- [Page 9] ---

128 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
the Paolo Veronese, the Parmigianino, the Carracci, Domenichino, Guido and Signor
Salvatore? Signor Salvatore is not afraid of Titian, of Guido, of Guercino or anyone
else.’ But this misguided enthusiasm appears to have done the artist more harm than
good.
Another lavish exhibition was arranged for the Holy Year of 1675 when over two
hundred pictures were shown by the Medici. Outside the church were hung tapestries
and damasks giving the illusion of stage scenery as the public walked among them;
while inside the cloisters and in one of the rooms opening on to them were works by
living and dead artists including Raphael, Titian and the Carracci. "
In later years when the great patrician families were more interested in selling than
in displaying their pictures, the exhibitions seem to have become far more commercial.
Thus 212 pictures, old and modern, were exhibited in 1736, a catalogue was issued,
and there were hopes that the Pope would make a bid.
There was one more regular art exhibition which began much later in the century
than those so far considered. This was held in the beautiful cloisters of S. Salvatore in
Lauro, a church that was bought for the Marchigian colony in Rome by Cardinal
Azzolini in 1669. Soon afterwards the members of this group began to celebrate the
anniversary of the arrival of the Holy House in Loreto on 10 December with elaborate
celebrations which included concerts and a picture exhibition. We know that in the
Holy Year of 1675, so rich in exhibitions, the one at S. Salvatore in Lauro was said to
equal any held in Rome. But here too the intention was to decorate the church and
glorify the lenders—often families from the Marche—rather than provide publicity
for the painters. Despite this, the exhibitions in S. Salvatore in Lauro were organised
far more professionally than any of the others. As from 1682 the painter Giuseppe
Ghezzi, life secretary of the Accademia di S. Luca and himself from Ascoli Piceno, was
in charge of the arrangements and he went to great trouble to perfect them. Families
prepared to lend had to be approached in good time; reliable porters had to be hired for
the transport and soldiers employed on 24-hour guard duty over the 10 and 11 Decem­
ber, during which days the paintings remained on view; adequate lighting had to be
arranged and criticisms of the public taken into account. Pride of place was always given
to a representation of the Madonna, but every kind of painting was included in the
exhibition. Ghezzi recommended five or six large canvases and about 200 smaller ones
as the ideal to be aimed at, but numbers obviously varied from year to year.
Quite soon considerable prestige attached to creating a striking effect, and—as so
often in Rome—rivalries between the various owners came powerfully to the fore. '
Thus in 1697 Prince Pio agreed to lend his pictures entirely at his own expense—on
condition that his alone were shown. They included a number of Venetian old masters
and were all hung together under the arcades of the loggia. But in order to satisfy other
collectors who also wanted to display their treasures further pictures were hung sepa­
rately in the upper gallery of the cloisters. The occasion turned into a brilliant
social ceremony with a sermon from the preacher of St Peter’s and a great assembly
of cardinals. We find a similar situation in 1708 when the Marchese Ruspoli at first

--- [Page 10] ---

THE WIDER PUBLIC 129
insisted that only his 194 pictures should be exhibited but finally agreed to Ghezzi’s
tactful suggestion that Monsignor Olivieri be allowed to hang 23 of his.
In all these exhibitions old masters were given far greater prominence than con­
temporary work and many pictures were repeatedly shown year after year. Sometimes,
however, they provided an opportunity for the public to see current painting of a kind
that would not normally be easily accessible. Thus Cardinal Ottoboni showed pictures
by Trevisani whom he assiduously employed, and in 1707 Cardinal Grimani, in a sit
of patriotic enthusiasm, sent in 23 ‘historié di maniera veneziana’ by Antonio Molinari
who, although he had died 25 years earlier, was still quite unknown to Roman collec­
tors. At other times the exhibition was used for more directly propagandist purposes.
In 1704, for instance, the Pope wished to make better known the victories won by
King John of Poland and encouraged his widow to lend a series of portraits and battle
pictures for this purpose.
Thus by the end of the century there were four regular exhibitions in Rome each
year—in March, July, August and December—quite apart from a large number of
occasional ones arranged for special events and casual affairs spontaneously organised
by a particular patron or artist. But none of the regular exhibitions had as its primary
.aim the opportunity for a painter to show new work, and some deliberately excluded
this. Essentially all of them made use of pictures, as of tapestries and banners, for decora­
tive purposes. From the strictly artistic point of view it is probable therefore that the
more informal showings were the most fruitful and that it was only gradually that
artists managed to turn to their own purposes what had been designed as a religious
function. For this reason the importance of regular patronage, and the need to exhibit
work on a permanent basis by painting altarpieces in the more frequented churches,
were comparatively little affected by seventeenth-century exhibitions.
None the less, the exhibitions cannot be considered in isolation. We must remember
also the increasing prevalence of dealers as Rome became more easily accessible to
travellers of all kinds, including Protestants; the ambitions of foreign rulers and patrons
who wanted artists from their own countries to record the glories of Rome and repro­
duce for them the triumphs of Italian painting; the consequent settling in Rome of
different national colonies of artists who often drew attention to themselves by their
strange dress and still stranger customs. When all this is taken into account it will be
appreciated that exhibitions were among a number of factors that introduced into Rome
the art of alien cultures often bearing little organic relationship to conditions in the city.
Still more significant, exhibitions helped to make painting a far more ‘public’ business
than it had ever been before. Pictures were readily available and within the reach of
everybody: no longer confined to the altar or to the family palace, they now hung
outside the church on ceremonial occasions, were propped up against the walls of
cloisters on specified days of the year, enticed the public into the dealer’s shop, were
bought, sold, exchanged, criticised, argued about. The artists themselves were more
visible than they had been: sketching in the ruins or among the great modern buildings
that sprang up everywhere and sketching each other so doing; making rapid impressions

--- [Page 11] ---

130 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
of the colourful life that they saw around them to send back to their northern homes,
reeling back drunk after the traditional ceremony of enrolling a new member into the
bentveughels. All this was leading to a growing appreciation of pictures as pictures rather
than as exclusively the records of some higher truth; a body of connoisseurs was
coming into being prepared to judge pictures on their aesthetic merits, and consequently
the subject-matter of painting was losing its old primaeval importance. This attitude is
one that only generally becomes apparent in the eighteenth century and that has been
pushed to its extreme limits in our own day; but it is already noticeable in a patron
such as Vincenzo Giustiniani and is enshrined in Caravaggio’s comment to him ‘that
it was as hard work to paint good pictures of flowers as of figures’.1 It is an attitude that
inevitably led to the triumph during the early years of the seventeenth century of
still-life painting, landscapes and a whole range of subjects which had hitherto not been
treated as worth attention in their own right. As an explanation of the main currents
of painting during the century it is fully as important as the far more publicised counter­
attacks of those theorists who wished to enforce a rigid hierarchy of suitable subject
matter on the artist.
At the same time, and partly owing to these very circumstances, a very wide and
hitherto unimportant range of the general public was beginning to take an interest in
painting and consequently to influence its development. We frequently come across
references to these anonymous patrons in the artistic literature of the seventeenth
century. Giulio Mancini was among the first to address them. In his Treatise he devoted
a small section to the ‘rules for buying, hanging and preserving pictures’.2 Carefully
distinguishing between the rich and the aristocratic on the one hand and the ‘huomini
di stato mediocre e di stato basso’ on the other, he pointed out that the latter would not
be in a position to distribute their largesse very freely. If they had to bargain with the
painter over the_price, they should find out how long the work took him and estimate
what his daily earnings should be ‘by comparison with the pay of a craftsman engaged
on similar work’. They were only likely to have two rooms available for hanging
pictures—the bedroom and the reception room. Devotional works should be placed
in the former; ‘cheerful and profane’ ones in the latter.
But what were the actual pictures owned by this submerged public? We can safely
assume that the great majority would today be of little interest to the art historian:
devotional pictures, above all, mass produced in the studios of successful painters or
" copied from the most influential altarpieces. We often hear of young artists being
employed on such work when they first came to Rome, and no doubt this was the
public with which they bargained for their living. If we move rather higher up the
social scale—to the clergy, traders, doctors and lawyers outside the ruling circles—we
are no better informed, but certain possibilities suggest themselves. Can it have been
for men such as these that Sassoferrato painted his restrained and archaising devotional
pictures which were long taken to be by some follower of Raphael (Plate 21b)? A
1 Bottari, VI, p. 123.
1 Mancini, I, p. 139.

--- [Page 12] ---

THE WIDER PUBLIC Hi
prolific painter, unrecorded by his contemporaries, he came to Rome from his native
Marche some time during the reign of Urban VIII. There he confined himself almost
exclusively to pictures of tire Holy Family, basing himself on three or four prototypes
which he varied from time to time. His models were Raphael, Annibale Carracci and
Domenichino at his most austere, and his simple pictures, which at their best are very
beautiful, appear to be almost polemical in their opposition to the current Baroque style.
At the beginning of his career he enjoyed a certain success. In 1641 the priests of
the Calabrian national church dedicated to S. Francesco da Paola commissioned from
him a painting of the titular saint kneeling in adoration while the Virgin and Child
appears on the clouds holding an emblem of charity. As the same priests also employed
their fellow-Calabrian Francesco Cozza on an altar painting it was probably he who
recommended Sassoferrato, for both had been pupils of Domenichino and were almost
certainly associated.1 Two years later what must have been an especially congenial task
led to his masterpiece. The Dominicans of Santa Sabina, anxious to raise money, had
decided to sell a Raphael Holy Family in their possession to Vincenzo Giustiniani, who
offered 2000 scudi. When negotiations fell through in 163 6 they rashly gave it to
Cardinal Antonio Barberini on the understanding that he would make it worth their
while. The Cardinal gratefully took the picture and regarded the matter as closed. Only
in 1643 did the Princess of Rossano, wife of Pope Innocent X’s nephew Camillo
Pamftli, decide to have it replaced by a Virgin and Child holding Rosaries with Saints
Catherine and Dominic for which she paid Sassoferrato a hundred scudi (Plate 21 a).2
Despite its great beauty the picture evidently did not please, for thereafter Sassoferrato’s public commissions became exceedingly rare. He was not ignored by the
grander patrons since the odd work by him turns up in many patrician collections,
though probably acquired towards the end of his life when classicism and Raphael
were once again the supreme and unchallenged guides. He drew and painted many
clerics, including an occasional cardinal and governor of some of the papal states.3 But
the great bulk of his work was for unknown patrons, and this fact, together with its
unfashionable style and limited range of subject-matter, strongly suggests that Sasso­
ferrato was principally employed by the professional community of which we know so
little—men like Giacinto GigE, minor civil servant and amateur poet, who kept a
detailed diary diEgently recording the great religious festivals and miraculous occur­
rences which were the most striking aspects of Baroque Rome to those outside the
grander circles of society.4
- iii -
The self-made man, unaffected by the traditional values and culture of those called
upon to rule, has often expressed an artistic taste offensive to the estabhshed canons.
1 Pollak, I, 1927, p. 129. 2 Berthier, p. 315.
3 Blunt and Cooke, pp. 102 if In the Galleria N azionale di Arte Antica in Rome is a signed portrait
of Monsignor Ottaviano Prati, who at different times was Governor of Benevento and Viterbo-Moroni,
LXI, p. 216, and CH, p. 363. 4 Gigli passim.

--- [Page 13] ---

132 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
When not in a position to enforce such taste, his expression of it has been of little
consequence. But when singly or in concert with his fellows he has become sufficiently
influential to attract artists willing to gratify him, denunciations have been many and
scathing. Such was the case in Baroque Italy. Beginning rather tentatively, the attacks
on the ‘ignorant’, those who were not wellborn or true connoisseurs, mounted in
violence as the numbers of such patrons increased. One fact was especially outrageous:
. the support that was won by the bambocciate, those little pictures which represented
scenes from everyday life. Though this support eventually came from the highest ranks
of society (an additional cause for indignation) there is reason to believe that it started
with the ‘uomini di stato mediocre e di stato basso’. Certainly a desire for the more
picturesque aspects of ‘reality’ in art has linked the uninitiated connoisseurs of many
different civilisations, and has been met by artists ranging from the sublime to the
abysmal. The history of the movement in seventeenth-century Rome is difficult to
unravel, but its occasionally visible course throws light on many different aspects of
patronage there.
The bamboccianti—so called in derision from the nickname given to their deformed
leader Pieter van Laer—were (in the words of the critic Giambattista Passeri) opening
a window on to life.1 What did they see out of it? Men at work—the cakeseller with his
ring-shaped loaves; the water-carrier outside the walls of the town; the tobacconist
filling the pipes of resting soldiers; the peasant feeding his horses; the smith. Men at play
—gulping down a quick drink at the inn but still on horseback to save time; dancing
the tarantella before a group of admiring spectators; playing morra in an old cave;
dressed in brilliant costumes for the carnival procession. Or a sudden glimpse of violence
as the dandified brigand—plumed hat gay against the stormy sky, pistol about to fire—
rides into the farm and terrorises the stable lad and his dog. Sometimes, but very rarely,
the bamboccianti turn some simple scene from ordinary life into a story—an old donkey
has died at last, fallen to the ground while still at work; the owner casts a last lingering
look at the pathetic corpse as he carries away the saddle; his womenfolk give way to
unconcealed grief. The one support of their livelihood has gone. What will they do
now? Much more often an ostensibly ‘historical’ subject is treated as a setting for a
realistic representation of everyday life. Erminia arrives distraught among the peasants
and finds them milking the cows while the washing hangs out on a line outside the
thatched cottage; John the Baptist preaches to a crowd of gossiping, dice-playing
country-folk and soldiers. Such is the world of the bamboccianti in the ’thirties and
’forties.2 The setting is Rome and the campagna, but not the great city of the humanists
and the tourists. It is a Rome where the broken column is used as a rough and ready
chair or the foundation for a farm house; where the fragment of a classical statue lies
unheeded beside a horse-trough; where buying and selling take place in dingy archways
1 Passeri, p. 72: ‘. . . egli [Van Laer] era singolare nel rapresentar la verita schietta, e pura nell’esser
suo, die li suoi quadri parcvano una finestra aperta, per la quale si fussero veduti quelli suoi successi
senza alcun divario, et alteratione. . . .’
2 For a general survey see introduction by Giulio Brigand to I Bamboccianti exhibition, Rome 1950.

--- [Page 14] ---

THE WIDER PUBLIC 133
and side-streets and no one bothers to look at the soaring obelisks or fountains dimly
visible in the distance. The characters are a satisfied and lively peasantry, hard working
and sober, merging almost imperceptibly into an urban proletariat of reasonable
prosperity.
The most regular condition of the Italian peasant’s life in the seventeenth century
was one of extreme poverty punctuated by periods of real starvation. Grain shortages
were endemic. Desperate and extraordinary measures totally failed to cope with them.
In 1648 free pardons were offered to the bandits who ravaged the campagna if only
they would bring corn into Rome. Beggars roamed the streets often in organised bands
held together by strange rituals. Epidemics threatened the population herded together
in overcrowded hovels. At frequent intervals the Tiber burst its banks and devastating
floods swept through the low-lying parts of the city. Unrest was always present; when
the Pope died and Rome was only partially governed by authorities with temporary
powers this permanent discontent would become crystallised. Crime assumed terrible
proportions, libels and riots came out into the open; soldiers were stationed at strategic
points to prevent the mob destroying the statue which only a few years earlier a syco­
phantic administration had erected to the Pope’s eternal memory. And the soldiers
themselves who came in large numbers to protect the princes and cardinals as they
assembled for the conclave took part in the riots and fought with the regular police
appointed to keep order. But such violence was prevalent enough without the occasion
of a vacant papacy to provide further stimulus. The French and the Spaniards attached
to their respective embassies lived in a state of permanent tension: often this exploded
into bloody riots which the armed police of the popes found exceedingly difficult to
repress.1
All this violence and misery was recorded with monotonous regularity by con­
temporary diarists: yet wesind only the barest hint of it in those works of the bamboccianti which have come down to us and which tend to convey a picture of untroubled
serenity. The view from their window was evidently a somewhat restricted one. We do
not find in their works the distortions of Georges de la Tour or the brutality of Jacques
Callot; nor yet the vulgar buffoons that so many of their contemporaries accused
them of putting into their pictures. It is certain that many bambocciate have not survived;
yet few of those that have, or that are recorded in inventories, have that aggressively
offensive character that their very vocal opponents claimed. How then should we
interpret them? Certainly not as social protest. Only Michael Sweerts gives his peasants
the dignity and monumentality that is almost polemically asserted by their contem­
poraries in the paintings of Le Nain or Velasquez. Such an attitude was scarcely con­
ceivable in seventeenth-century Rome where cultivated society and all who aped it
looked upon the poor with extreme distaste. Arcadian sentiment was a purely literary
phenomenon with no repercussions as yet on actual social behaviour or inclinations.
‘It must not be imagined’, wrote Giovanni Battista Doni of contemporary operatic
performances, ‘that the shepherds who are brought on to the stage are the sordid and
1 Gigli passim, especially pp. 77, 162, 290, 324-5.

--- [Page 15] ---

134 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
vulgar fellows who look after the flocks these days. . . Z1 There is much point in Sal­
vator Rosa’s bitter protest about the welcome given to the bambocciate:
Cosi vivi mendichi affliti e nudi
non trovan da coloro un sol danaro,
che ne’ dipinti poi spendon gli scudi:
. Quel che aboriscon vivo, aman dipinto;
perchè ornai nelle corti è vecchia usanza
di aver in prezzo solamente il finto . . ,2 -
‘What they abhor in real life they like to see in a picture’—within limits at least. The
figures in the bambocciate are the ‘good poor’, and they are cut down to safely small
proportions. Everyone insisted on this: ‘Every day’, wrote Passeri of Van Laer, ‘he
would paint pictures of varying size but with small figures, about on e palmo (221 cm.)
high—never any bigger.’3 Later the backgrounds were to increase—the Mils and the
trees, the churches and palaces with great flights of steps and spacious colonnades were
to assume overwhelming proportions and engulf the little beggars and shepherds who
lay at their bases; and then the poor would become purely ‘picturesque’ additions to the
setting. It is an attitude that is already implicit even in much of the earlier work of the
bamboccianti.
None the less, Pieter Van Laer did introduce something quite new into Italian
painting; he and Ms followers brought witMn the scope of art an enormous range of
new material; Ms shepherds were not those ‘of the past when the profession was still a
noble one’.4 There had been some precedents of course-—Bassano and Caravaggio
perhaps, who are linked together m Bellori’s denunciation of the trend, but how much
more satisfying they had been for the cultivated amateur ! And Caravaggio Mmself had
never painted a secular pamting of ordmary people going about their ordinary occu­
pations. The proletarian models of Ms earlier works, dazzlingly dressed or undressed,
are clearly adapted to a sophisticated, not to say corrupt, taste. And the deeply moving
peasants of Ms later pictures always take part in a conventional religious scene. But
Caravaggio’s was the spiritual and aesthetic revolution that cleared the ground for the
bamboccianti. For the first time the poor emerge from a shadowy background and are
given as much prominence as the great or the sacred. His immediate followers in Italy
only rarely pursued the line of development implicit in tMs attitude. A sober appraisal
of daily fife is not what we look for in their work, wMch recalls far more the fanciful
and sometimes grotèsque mcidents of the picaresque novel. More significant had been
some of the pictures of Anfflbale Carracci—the Beaneater in the Colonna gallery, for
instance, or Ms drawings of the working classes at their daily occupations. But these
1 G. B. Doni, II, p. 16: '. . . non debbiamo immaginarci, che i Pastori, che s’introducono, siano di
questi sordidi, e volgari, che oggi guardone il bestiame. . . .'
2 Rosa; Della Pittura, lines 255-8 and 262-5.
3 Passeri, p. 72.
4 Continuation of quotation in note 1, above: ‘ma quelli del secolo antico, nel quale i più nobili
esercitavono quest’arte’.

--- [Page 16] ---

THE WIDER PUBLIC U5
had only been incidental to a far more orthodox career, as had all such ventures until
now. Thus there were no real forerunners to the bamboccianti, and this absence was in
itself a significant indication of some of the difficulties which were bound to face any
artist interested in breaking away from the recognised categories of painting.
When Pieter Van Laer came to Rome in 1625 he was already 31 years old, and
hence a fully mature painter. He had grown up in the Protestant town of Haarlem
where a tradition of‘realistic’ painting was firmly established, free from the interference
of aristocratic or idealistic prejudice. In Rome itself he associated with the newly formed
schildersbent, and lived the typically ‘bohemian’ existence of its members. Thus by
religion and social circumstances he was for some years at least totally cut off from
official patronage. Unattached to the household of any prince or ambassador, he
evidently sold his little scenes of peasant and animal life how and where he could—at
the fairs of Corpus Domini, perhaps, and certainly to dealers.
Success came quite soon; within ten years he could ask 30/35 scudi a picture, an
astonishingly high price, much more than many an established painter of the day could
expect.1 Indeed Van Laer soon acquired a reputation, which he never lost, of being a
very expensive artist. But it is difficult to find out exactly who bought his works.
Other painters, we are told, ‘even those of some reputation looked at his pictures with
great delight, and tried to possess some for themselves as examples of how to express
reality so well’.2 His Northern compatriots must have been in the forefront of these
admirers; indeed we know that Hermann Swanevelt, the Dutch landscape painter,
owned two.3 It is a greater surprise to find that Pietro Testa himself, in later years so
scornful of realism in art, was in touch with the world of the early bamboccianti and may
therefore have owned examples of their work.4 Quite soon the most influential patrons
in Rome began to take a cautious interest in this new phenomenon. Niccolo Simonelli,
the amateur dealer, a man very proud of his discernment as a collector, owned two for
a short time—one showing a peasant with a lamb and a dog, the other a night scene—
before exchanging them for something else.5 Vincenzo Giustiniani, the especial protec­
tor of Caravaggio’s Northern followers, acquired two rather uncharacteristic examples
—a Landscape with figures and animals and a small scene of St Eustace hunting—though he
did not bother to frame them. Even Cassiano dal Pozzo seems to have been tempted and
to have owned one painting by Van Laer. Finally about three years before leaving
Rome the artist dedicated a series of eight engravings of animals to Don Ferdinando
1 In 1636 two small paintings by Van Laer were worth 32 scudi—see note 3, below.
2 Passeri, p. 74. ' ' ' ' ’
Lely seems to have been an admirer, for in his sale catalogue (Burlington Magazine, 1943, pp. 185-191)
various genre scenes are attributed to ‘Bamboots’. For the reactions of painters to other bamboccianti see
Baldinucci, VI, 1728, pp. 602-4.
3 Bertolotti: Artisti belgi c olandesi, pp. 127 If., reports the case brought by Swanevelt against
Francesco Catalano of Benevento whom he accused of stealing two pictures by Van Laer. The testimony
provides much useful information about the artist’s circumstances.
4 ibid., p. 134.
5 ibid., p. 133. Another friend and admirer of Van Laer was the Roman merchant Bernardino
Lorca—see letter of Sebastiano Resta dated 27 February 1704 published by Bottari, II, p. 106.

--- [Page 17] ---

136 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
Afan de Ribera, the Viceroy of Naples—but, as will become clear, the Spaniards were
at all times closely associated with the success of the bamboccianti.
For all this success Van Laer himself probably remained on the outer fringes of
society and we must assume that the bulk of his clientèle was not made up of the great
princes and the learned patrons who figure so prominently in this story but was to be
found rather among the anonymous ‘uomini di stato mediocre’ about whom we know
so little. It is therefore a significant sign of the times that he was able to make such a
great impact on painting in Rome and indeed Europe. By the time he left Rome in
about 1639 he had proved that the demand for his little genre paintings was large and
rewarding. There were many ready to exploit it.
Among these was Michelangelo Cerquozzi, a Roman by birth.1 He too probably
began by selling his pictures cheaply to dealers before attracting the attention of connois­
seurs. But his nationality, if nothing else, made his situation much easier and brought
him into far closer contact with his patrons than had been possible for a foreigner such
as Van Laer. Because of this, Cerquozzi’s life and work perfectly illustrate the limits
within which a ‘realistic’ painter could express himself in the essentially aristocratic
society of seventeenth-century Rome.
He too was much admired by his fellow-artists. His two closest friends were
painters—Domenico Viola and Giacinto Brandi—and he was on excellent terms with
Pietro da Cortona. He was always generous with younger men and he went out of his
way to encourage his potential rival Giacomo Borgognone. We also know that some
of his most important admirers and patrons came from the professional classes. There
was, for instance, the distinguished lawyer Raffaele Marchesi to whom he bequeathed
some of his works, and the doctor Vincenzo Neri whom with a group of other friends
he immortalised in one of his finest paintings (Plate 22a).2
Cerquozzi was soon taken up by some of the leading aristocratic families, but of a
kind rather different from those who circled round the Barberini court and helped to
spread the fame of artists such as Romanelli, Poussin and Testa. His first great successes
were apparently painted for an official at the Spanish Embassy and it is possible that he
may have been employed there at the very time that Velasquez came to stay as a guest
of the Ambassador Monterey in 1630? There is also some evidence to suggest that both
Cerquozzi and Velasquez painted bambocciate for the most important of the Hispanophil
clans in Rome, the Colonna, though this is more likely to have been during the great
artist’s second visit.4 Certainly Cerquozzi’s career was closely linked to Spain and her
.supporters, in . Rome. He himself used to wear Spanish dress, and until his later years.
1 See the lives of Cerquozzi by Passeri and Baldinucci and also his will published by Bertolotti in
Arte e Storia, V, 1886, p. 22. 2 ibid.
3 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 190. It is however exceedingly unlikely that this early work was painted
in 1615 when the artist was aged only 15. Van Laer did not come to Rome until 1624. The significance
of Cerquozzi for Velasquez was pointed out by Roberto Longhi in 1950, and though his attribution to
Velasquez of the so-called ‘Rissa all’ambasciata di Spagna’ is not altogether convincing, the general point
is valid, and it is perfectly reasonable to assume that the two men may have met at the Spanish Embassy.
4 In Ghezzi’s notes on the Colonna collection (see p. 125, note 1) there is a reference to Due bambocciate
di Velasco. Cerquozzi certainly painted a good deal for the Colonna—see Ferdinando Colonna.

--- [Page 18] ---

Plate 2i
dlihC
dna
annodaM
:OtarrefossaS
.b
stniaS
htiw
yrasoR
eht
fo
annodaM
:otarrefossaS
.

--- [Page 19] ---

Plate 22
a. Cerquozzi: The artist with a group of friends
b. Cerquozzi: The revolt of Masaniello

--- [Page 20] ---

Plate 23
a. Cerquozzi: Women’s bath
b. Salvator Rosa: The death of Regulus

--- [Page 21] ---

Plate 24
Salvator Rosa: Fortune

--- [Page 22] ---

THE WIDER PUBLIC 137
nearly all his more important patrons were within the Spanish sphere of influence.
In 1647, for instance, he was collaborating with Jan Miel, Giacomo Borgognone and
others on the illustration of the second volume of Famiano Strada’s De Bello Belgico, a
celebration of Alessandro Farnese’s campaigns on behalf of the Spaniards in the Low
Countries; Cardinal Rapaccioli, who died in 1657, and who owned many of his
pictures, was boycotted by the French in the conclave of 1655 because of his Spanish
affiliations1; Monsignor Raggi, another of his admirers, was a Genoese and also devoted
to the Spanish cause. So too was the Modenese Count Camillo Carandini.2
Whatever their political affiliations, most of these families showed a striking con­
trast in taste with the more cultivated Barberini circle. They tended to ignore the
grander history painters and the noble balance between classicism and Venetian colour
which these artists were fostering as well as the exuberance of the Baroque. Again and
again we find them concentrating on landscape painters such as Gaspard Dughet or
Salvator Rosa as well as on other artists who specialised in subjects similar to those of
Cerquozzi—Jan Miel, for instance, or Giacomo Borgognone, the battle painter—and
bamboccianti of later generations. Three of Cerquozzi’s most enthusiastic patrons, the
Counts Carpegna and Carandini and Monsignor Raggi, were all collectors of this type
of picture.
And yet his success with the aristocratic society of Rome is certainly reflected in his
art. As far as dating can be established at all, it seems that the small pictures with scenes
from popular life belong mostly to his early years when he was closely following Van
Laer and largely working for dealers, but that later he turned more and more to much
larger pictures, which were painted to commission, and that he then widened the range
of his subject-matter. There is not much reason for believing that this change was the
direct result, of specific pressures from his patrons, for we know that the more authen­
tically popular and coarse bambocciate continued to fetch very high prices.3 Rather it
seems to have sprung naturally from his closer association with them and, consequently,
from a gradual acceptance of their values—a process not unknown among artists of all
kinds since Cerquozzi’s day. It may not be extravagant to see his dilemma reflected in
the manner of his private fife—the life of a man who painted the essentially anti­
Spanish common people for sympathisers with Spain4: careful and conscientious in his
1 In 1654-5 the French Ambassador reported that Rapaccioli was 'autant Espagnol que Cardinal’—
Valsrey, p. 220.
~ 2 Raggi’s patronage of Cerquozzi is mentioned by Baldinucci and is confirmed by the fact that in
1701 the Marchese Raggi lent ‘cinque quadri bellissimi bislunghi tutti d’una misura’ by the artist to the
•exhibition at S. Salvatore in Lauro—Ghezzi papers in the Museo di Roma; • ' ■
Conte Camillo Carandini (1619-1663) is referred to briefly in the history of the family by G. A.
Lotti of 1784. I am most grateful to the Marchesa Elisa Carandini for drawing my attention to this book.
3 Even in Florence the Marchese Filippo Corsini was proud to own a painting by Jan Miel of a
‘barone, che in atto di sedere, attraversatosi aile ginocchia un piccolo fanciullo, con un certo suo straccio
gli toglie 1’immondezza dalla deretana parte’—Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 368.
4 In 1642 Amayden reported that on the French side were the ‘bottegari e Gente bassa’ and on the
Spanish side the ‘Gentiluomini e cittadini più onorati’—Relazione della Citti di Roma fatta nell’Anno 1642—
MS. hi Biblioteca Casanatense, Rome, 5001. Amayden was a Spanish protégé and this should be borne
in mind when evaluating his report.

--- [Page 23] ---

i38 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
work, the friend of princes and prelates, yet coarse and vulgar in his speech; ordering a
couple of artichokes on his deathbed ‘che io mi voglio saziare a mio modo’ in an almost
symbolic last minute return to the popular Use he had so often depicted, and then
buried with full pomp by the Accademia di S. Luca, by now the very stronghold of
that classical idealism which he had seemed to thwart but which had perhaps thwarted
him.1 In fact, once Cerquozzi was taken up by the Roman aristocracy it became almost
impossible for him to paint the life of the very poor with sympathy and under­
standing.
This is apparent in his large still lifes with figures—lush clusters of grapes cascading
down over prettified boys and girls, somewhat sentimentally or erotically posed.2 In
these pictures he showed that he was quite prepared and able to move away from the
direct observation of the Use which he saw around him ‘without any kind of alteration’
—the claim that Passeri made for Van Laer. Indeed, his reputation to some extent rested
on the extraordinarily imaginative nature of his talents—his ability to paint scenes he
had never actually witnessed himself. And these paintings could be admired by his
contemporaries for certain purely aesthetic elements—‘that exquisite quality of his
paint and colour which made it appear Eke crushed jewels’.3 This, presumably, was the
appeal of his work to a cultivated connoisseur such as Cardinal Massimi, the admirer of
Claude, Poussin and Velasquez, but also the owner of four scenes of country life by
Cerquozzi.
Above all he specialised in battle pictures, a more respectable genre than bambocciate,
and one in which his success is testified by the nicknameof‘Michelangelo delle Battaglie’.
His work in this field demonstrates the truth of Fritz Saxl’s subtle analysis of the ‘battle
scene without a hero’—pictures painted for a society that was only indirectly affected by
the wars that raged throughout Europe during most of the seventeenth century.4
Brilliantly dressed cavaliers charge at each other; solidly built horses collapse and
trample soldiers underfoot; the air is fit up with the flames from discharged guns and
smoke rises to the clouds; afterwards the dead are plundered, the wounded are treated,
and couriers are sent off to announce victory. Victory for whom? That hardly mattered;
the attraction of these pictures lay in the opportunity that they offered for vicarious
participation in battles that were changing the shape of Europe far outside the backwater
into which Italy had now sunk. Such detachment also played its part in stressing the
‘realism’ of the scene. The anti-heroic confusion, the smoke rising from distant battle­
- fields—at times these almost seem to foreshadow Stendhal’s equally incoherent, though
far more subtle, view of Waterloo'. ' ............... ' ..............
Cerquozzi’s position was naturally affected by the death of Urban VIII, when
exclusive French influence came to an end and his natural patrons, the Spanish party,
began to occupy the centre of the stage. A crisis may have occurred in about 1648 when
1 Passeri, p. 289.
2 Briganti, 1954, pp. 47-52.
3 Passeri, p. 288.
4 Saxl.

--- [Page 24] ---

THE WIDER PUBLIC 139
he probably painted one of his masterpieces The Revolt of Masaniello (Plate 22b). The
circumstances are very mysterious and in many ways the picture marks something of a
turning-point in his career, for such records of contemporary events were almost
unknown in Italian art of the seventeenth century unless specifically associated with a
particular patron.1 Who commissioned this remarkable picture? We only know that
by the end of the century it belonged to the Spada collection.2 If it was actually painted
for Cardinal Bernardino, who brought together most of the pictures in the palace, it
must surely have had some political significance. For Spada who had been papal nunzio
in Paris was firmly in the French camp. Indeed a few years later Mazarin told the sup­
porters of France to vote for Spada in the conclave that followed the death of Innocent
X: but the plan came to nothing for the Spaniards used their veto.3 Cerquozzi, deeply
committed to the Spanish cause, painting the spectacle of their most humiliating defeat
for the most Francophil of Cardinals—it was typical of much in his career. The picture
itself is inscrutable; never was Cerquozzi’s ‘neutrality’, his anti-heroic element, so much
in evidence. Vividly it portrays the events of 7 July 1647 with the most scrupulous
accuracy, a remarkable instance of objectivity exercised on a subject that stirred the
passions of Europe.4 It has none of the melodramatic features that we find in the
portraits of the fishmonger destined to pass into Neapolitan folk-art. Compared to the
almost mediaeval vision of Cerquozzi’s contemporary Micco Spadaro who depicts
Masaniello like some early saint twice in the same canvas—in the background exhorting
the crowd with his crucifix, in the foreground at the height of his power, in velvet
headdress and white plumes on his way to visit the Spanish viceroy—the Roman
seems cold and detached.5
With the Revolt of Masaniello probably began Cerquozzi’s main phase of collabor­
ation with the architectural painter Viviano Codazzi who arrived in Rome from Naples
towards the end of 1647 and who may well have supplied the eye-witness account on
which the picture is based.6 The collaboration was of great importance because it
confirmed Cerquozzi’s move away from the more simple and direct presentation of
peasant life towards the grandiose and even the exotic. Some time after 1657, only three
years before Cerquozzi’s death, the two artists painted several pictures for Cardinal
Flavio Chigi, nephew of Pope Alexander VII and consequently the most influential
1 The most extraordinary case of such a painting is The Death of Wallenstein by Pietro Paolini—see
-- Marabottini, 1963.
2 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 192, says only: ‘si vede nel Palazzo del Bali Spada. . .’.
. 3 Leman, pp. 13 if, and Hanotaux, p. 9. .
4 There are a number of accounts of Masaniello’s revolt, but for the immediate impact it made in
Rome at the time see the dispatches of Cardinal Filomarino published in Archivio Storico Italiano, IX,
1846, pp. 379-393­
5 Micco Spadaro’s pictures are in the Museo di S. Martino, Naples.
6 To claim as Professor Longhi and Estella Brunetti (1958, p. 311) have done that Codazzi was
painting with Cerquozzi and others in Rome between 1625 and 1635 is to fly in the face of Codazzi’s
own words of 1636: ‘Io venni dalla predetta mia patria [Bergamo] da quindici anni e venni in Napoli,
et sempre ho abitato in Napoli al Baglivo’—Prota-Giurleo, p. 77. None of Dr Brunetti’s evidence,
stylistic or documentary, seems to me to be really conclusive and I can see no reason for not assuming
that the collaboration between the two artists began in Rome after 1647.

--- [Page 25] ---

140 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
patron in Rome.1 Two os the works that Cerquozzi, now at the centre os the artistic
scene, painted for him stand out for their curious subjects, about which we can only say
that they are certainly not representations of anything seen in seventeenth-century Italy.
Indeed no actual villa or palace ever corresponded to the vast, fantastic structure that
Codazzi envisaged as the setting for Cerquozzi’s princely family in The Arrival at the
Palace, although these figures, with coach and horses, retinue and dogs, are acutely
realised as, still more, are the peasants selling water melons or lounging on the ground
unperturbed by the general grandeur. Still less plausible is the vaulted Women s Bath
(Plate 23 a)—in itself a surprising choice for a cardinal, were it not for the fact that Chigi
‘only thought of hunting, of conversations and of banquets in order to overcome the
venereal impulses which powerfully raged within him’.2 A turbaned Oriental wistfully
surveys the scene while elegant young dandies prepare to make the most of the obvious
opportunities that await them. Though the dress is certainly contemporary, the events
described must surely refer obliquely to the notorious stufe of Renaissance Rome or
perhaps evoke some traveller’s tales from the East. So far had Cerquozzi moved from
his original inspiration.
The allurement of a predominantly aristocratic patronage was the most important
but not the only obstacle that stood in the way of a school of ‘realistic’ painting in
Rome; there was also the antagonism to such painting expressed on theoretical grounds
—in some circles even before the arrival of Van Laer and. later to become a widely held
dogma. This need not in itself have proved decisive, for the very bitterness with which
contemporary writers reported the success of the bamboccianti shows that many patrons
were far outside the reach of such theoretical considerations when buying pictures.
But it did serve to keep the bamboccianti in an inferior position from which they were
always tempted to extricate themselves once they had achieved any success. Cerquozzi
toyed with becoming a‘history painter’ and Jan Miel also found himself veering between
a profitable bambocciante manner, which earned him discredit in the social circles to
which he aspired, and the more acceptable branch of ‘history painting’ which was far
less suited to his talents.
To a large extent the theoretical objections to the bamboccianti were the direct
outcome of the very conditions which had made their success possible: the démocratis­
ation of art and its wider response to a growing public. Rome in the seventeenth century
was a society of constantly changing nouveaux-riches and parvenus desperately anxious
to conceal the fact by marrying into the great old patrician families, now bereft of
1 Once again it cannot be conclusively proved that the two pictures, along with a number of others
recorded by contemporary sources and still in the collection of the Chigi descendants, were actually
painted for Cardinal Chigi although all writers of the time refer to his owning them and they are listed
in his inventories. There is, however, no document showing any actual payment to Cerquozzi and it is
just conceivable—though most unlikely—that these pictures also were painted for the Colonna and then
acquired with many others by the Chigi in 1661 when they bought the palace (later Palazzo Odescalchi)
at SS. Apostoli with all its contents from the Colonna—Golzio, 1939, p. 3.
2 From a report by Ferdinando Raggi, Genoese diplomatic agent in Rome quoted by Achille Neri,
1883.

--- [Page 26] ---

THE WIDER PUBLIC 141
power and bankrupt. But an aristocratic taste had to be acquired as well as aristocratic
relations, and the problem was not always as easy to solve. Again and again the attacks
launched on the baniboccianti by other artists and theorists were deliberately designed to
rub this sore spot of the new ruling class. The most powerful plea to snobbery was
scarcely even concealed by more abstruse considerations. Admiration of the trivial world
of Van Laer and Cerquozzi was contemptible because it was widespread, an attribute
of the crowd rather than the connoisseur. All the still embryonic distinctions between
the general public and the man of taste were pressed into service to discredit the move­
ment, and in the course of these attacks the bambocciate were described in terms that
often bore little resemblance to the actual pictures. And inevitably the onslaught grew
more fierce as that more ‘liberal’ form of connoisseurship, which was one of the
reasons for Cerquozzi’s success, became more widespread.
His early admission into the Accademia di S. Luca shows indeed that in the ’thirties
there was no hostility from that quarter.1 The attacks seem rather to have reached their
peak in the late ’forties and ’fifties, at the time when he was achieving his greatest
triumphs. This was a period of acute financial depression, and no doubt the success of
the baniboccianti was linked to their considerably cheaper prices in the struggle for
survival. Indeed this is one of the charges specifically brought against them by the many
artists who were among their most ferocious enemies. Guido Reni (who died in 1642)
was among the first of these, but the terms in which he expressed his hatred of the
movement make it reasonably clear that his biographer Passeri was attributing some
of his own feelings to the master.2
In 1651 came a famous exchange of letters between Andrea Sacchi and Albani.3
The Roman artist wrote to his ageing master in Bologna to tell him of the success of
the baniboccianti and to ask for his opinion on the matter. This came quickly enough in
the form of a stream of abuse. But though the correspondence has always been treated
as of cardinal importance in the history of the movement, in fact its significance is not
altogether clear. When Sacchi wrote to Albani of this new and deplorable phenomenon,
the bamboccianti had already been painting for a quarter of a century. And the reference
to their earning six or eight scudi for a picture is absurd, as both artists must have known.4
Long before this the leading figures had been charging several times that sum. Though
Albani and Sacchi no doubt held the hostile views attributed to them, it seems quite
possible that the letters themselves were carefully doctored by their not very scrupulous
editor Malvasia. Two points, however, stand out: that intense hatred for the bamboc­
cianti developed relatively'late, when for the first time they were being taken seriously
by the grandest patrons, and that financial questions played a considerable part in their
success and in the opposition they aroused.
1 Hoogewerff, 1913, p. 50.
2 Passeri, p. 96.
3 Malvasia, II, pp. 179 ff.
4 Between 1646 and 1648, for instance, Don Antonio Ruffo bought a battle picture by Cerquozzi,
size 4x6 palmi, for 80 ducats. By 1671 a Van Laer, size 4 palmi, was valued at 3 50 ducats—Ruffo, p. 189.

--- [Page 27] ---

142 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
- iv -
Some years earlier another opponent with very mixed motives had joined the virulent
onslaught. Salvator Rosa’s career was confused with and bedevilled by the triumph of
the bamboccianti from the very start. On his arrival in Rome in 1637 one of his first
patrons had been the amateur dealer Niccolò Simonelli who also showed an interest in
Pieter van Laer.1 Driven from Rome not long after, partly through the hostility of the
' all powerful Bernini, he settled in Florence only to find there some of Michelangelo
Cerquozzi’s keenest admirers, above all the Corsini and Salviati families. Cerquozzi
and Rosa were considered to be rivals as landscape painters2—an outrageous insult to
Salvator who looked upon himself as a serious painter of moral ‘histories’, only com­
pelled to indulge in landscapes and battles because of the obtuseness of lais clients. Back
in Rome in 1649 he found Cerquozzi more fashionable than ever. Unable to bear the
situation, he launched into the attack.3 After enumerating the sort of subjects that were
treated by the artist and his followers, he too showed that his real bitterness was reserved
for their patrons: ‘And these pictures are so much admired that they can be found
magnificently framed in the apartments of the great.’ That was the real insult. But still
the bamboccianti pursued Rosa. No sooner was Cerquozzi safely dead in March 1660
than he found himself having to buy a copy of a Van Laer to gratify his closest friend
Giambattista Ricciardi.4
Rosa’s career was, in fact, a tribute to the good judgement of a wide variety of
Roman connoisseurs who compelled him to stick to the small romantic landscapes
which show his true genius. But to him it appeared very different. He was desperately
anxious, and even prepared to humiliate himself, to be given some great public com­
mission and it is somewhat surprising that he so dismally failed.5 Far worse painters than
he were given the chance, and his bitter quarrels with the Accademia di S. Luca would
not have deterred a really authoritative cardinal. However, there is little doubt that
Rosa wished above all to find some Cassiano dal Pozzo or Camillo Massimi to foster
what he considered to be his special talent—the painting of tragic and complex allegories
and histories. Though he referred to him only once in passing, he seems to have visual­
ised himself as a Poussin working for a cultivated élite, and curiously enough when
settled in Italy at the end of the century Lord Shaftesbury drew a parallel between these
two ‘honest moral men’ who had, so he heard from ‘old virtuosos and painters’, been
good friends.6 But Rosa never succeeded in his ambition. In Florence he did indeed find
himself at the centre osa brilliant society where his talents for conversation, music,
1 Passeri, p. 388. It was Simonelli who in 1638 arranged for the exhibiting of Rosa’s Tityus at the
Pantheon.
2 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 191.
3 The date of Rosa’s satire on Painting is not certain. It was mentioned for the first time in a letter
of 1651 and may have been written in Florence. For an analysis see Limentani, 1961, pp. 163-79.
4 Letter from Salvator Rosa to G. B. Ricciardi dated 2 April 1660—de R...Jdis, 1939, p. 109.
5 See the lives of Rosa by Passeri and Baldinucci.
6 Shaftesbury, Second Characters, p. 15. As far as I am aware this interesting passage has never been
noticed by art historians.

--- [Page 28] ---

THE WIDER PUBLIC 143
poetry and mime were as much admired as his painting, and it is true that in Rome
also he fascinated a number of highly placed churchmen, but never in the way that he
really wanted. ‘I know that as a Stoic you would mock all this,’ he wrote to a friend,
describing some social success, ‘but what is one to do? He who cannot have the roast
meat must needs satisfy himself with the aroma.’1 With its combination of bitterness,
assumed self-depreciation and homely proverb the phrase is characteristic. So too is the
allusion to Stoicism. All over Europe this philosophy had been gaining ground ever
since the late sixteenth century until for some daring thinkers it virtually replaced
Christianity as a guiding creed. Even when not so intense it still coloured the ethics and
imagery of men of action and artists alike. With its proud disdain for the vicissitudes
of fortune it was a philosophy well suited to the storm-tossed seventeenth century. And
as men are more likely to look to their beliefs for support in misfortune than for self­
control in triumph, it particularly appealed to those who felt that the world had treated
them badly or that its more ostentatious prizes were not for them. Plutarch and Seneca
were ransacked for quotations, and innumerable paintings recorded the deeds of the
virtuous, iron-willed heroes of antiquity. Salvator Rosa, in particular, would passion­
ately study the Stoics and search in their writings for themes for his pictures and prints.
But far from tapping a responsive chord in a public which doted on such stories, he
would find that his potential clients only wanted his landscapes, small ones at that,
‘always they want my small landscapes, always, always, my small ones’.2 He did not
make it easy for them. When the unfortunate prelate who was responsible for this
outburst tactfully enquired about the price of a large picture, Rosa merely answered
‘a million’, and thus ended the discussion.3 In another fit of ill-temper he wrote: ‘I am
delighted that these pictures of mine are going to the bad, so that people will forget that
I ever painted landscapes.’4 Of course they did not forget, for he was keenly and rightly
admired. But always by the wrong people—-those who specialised in bambocciate, like
the Conte Carpegna and the Marchese Teodoli, or those whose tastes were notoriously
frivolous like the Duke of Modena who wrote to his agent in Rome asking for battles
by Rosa and Borgognone, flower pictures by Mario ‘de Fiori’ and Cerquozzi, land­
scapes by Gaspard Poussin and fables by Pier Francesco Mola.5 Only rarely did the
learned connoisseurs whom he hoped to impress with his frigid and rhetorical history
paintings show any interest.
- His greatest patron in Rome was his banker, Carlo de’ Rossi, brother of the famous
composer Luigi and himself a talented musician.6 De’ Rossi paid him a regular 6 per
cent, interest on the 4000 scudi that Rosa deposited with him, but in "1667 the two
men quarrelled bitterly—‘he has treated me very meanly and showed little gratitude’,
1 Letter to Ricciardi of 9 October 1666—Limentani, 1950, p. 138.
2 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 581. Rosa referred to himself as a Stoic in a letter to Ricciardi dated 27 May
1651—Limentani, 1950, p. 79.
3 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 581.
4 In 1666—de Rinaldis, 1939, p. 191.
5 A. Venturi, pp. 264-5.
6 Limentani, 1950, p. 13 9.

--- [Page 29] ---

144 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
claimed the artist.1 Before that, however, De’ Rossi had assembled what amounted to a
private museum of Rosa’s works consisting of a large gallery and several small rooms.2
In these he hung allegorical and history paintings such as the Prometheus, La Fortuna and
above all the artist’s masterpiece, Regulus killed by the Carthaginians (Plate 23b), in which
Rosa’s grudging obligation to the bamboccianti and instinctive love of the picturesque
are raised to high, heroic tragedy through his study of the Stoic historians. De’ Rossi
also obtained quantities of the smaller pictures which Rosa so affected to despise—
battles, sea pieces, landscapes and weird scenes of witchcraft—and he combined his
esteem for the artist with a shrewd sense of business by filling the family chapel in the
Madonna di Montesanto with altarpieces which Rosa painted without charge so as to
make at least one appearance in public.3
Yet De’ Rossi, for all his friendship, was no Dal Pozzo. There is no evidence to
suggest that he ever gave Salvator Rosa the encouragement and intellectual stimulus
which he clearly wanted despite his show of bravado. To find such a patron Rosa had
to turn to Florence, the home of his closest friend the poet Giambattista Ricciardi. For
him he went on painting a number of pictures long after he had settled in Rome and to
him he looked for constant advice: ‘if you happen to get hold of some lively story invol­
ving a soldier with a woman I would be very grateful...’, he wrote on one occasion.4
Or again, in a revealing letter: ‘Remember that I want something new with only a few
figures. And as the canvas is a tall one, it would not matter if there had to be a figure
in the air above the clouds or something. I had wondered (if you thought so too)
whether that image in Virgil’s Georgies might not be suitable: when Justice departs
from the Earth and leaves her sword and scales with some shepherds. Do please think
about this; Rome has heard that I have the most original ideas, and so I must five up to
this reputation as much as possible.’5
To Ricciardi too he disclosed those astonishing impressions of the landscapes he
visited which showed how deeply felt and genuine was the romantic sentiment in his
painting. The country, he wrote,6 ‘is such an extravagant mixture of the horrid and the
tame [d’un misto cosi stravagante d’orrido e di domestico], of the flat and the precipi­
tous, that the eye cannot hope to find anything more pleasing. I can swear to you that
the colours of one of those mountains are far more beautiful than everything I have
seen under the Tuscan sky. Your Verrucola (which I used to think had a certain horrid
quality) I will in suture call a garden by comparison with the mountains I have crossed.
Good God, how many times I wanted you with me, how many times I called to you to
look at some solitary hermit sighted on the way—Fate alone knows how much they
tempted me! We went to Ancona and Sirolo and on the way back to Assisi over and
above the journey—all places of extraordinary fascination for a painting.
1 De Rinaldis, 1939, p. 199.
2 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 570. There is also a reference to De’ Rossi’s collection in Bellori’s Nota
de Musei. 3 ibid. p. 569. The paintings are now at Chantilly. .
4 De Rinaldis, 1939, p. 17—Letter of 24 April 1651.
5 ibid., p. 19—Letter of 12 May 1Ó51.
6 Bottari, I, p. 450. Letter of 13 May 1662.

--- [Page 30] ---

THE WIDER PUBLIC 145
‘At Terni (that is four miles off our road) I saw the famous waterfall of the Velino,
the river of Rieti. It was enough to inspire the most exacting brain through its horrid
beauty: the sight of a river hurtling down a half-mile mountain precipice and raising a
column of foam fully as high. Believe me, nowhere there did I look or move without
thinking of you. . . .’
Would Ricciardi, in fact, have responded to Rosa’s precocious eighteenth-century
enthusiasm? As his letters have not survived, we must accept the artist’s trust, but
nothing in his frigid and pedantic literary work suggests that he was the sort of man to
have any true appreciation of Rosa’s qualities. He was certainly a devoted and much­
loved friend, but Rosa does not seem to have thought very highly of his artistic judge­
ment: ‘the little picture which you consider to be Florentine seems to me to be Flemish,
and the one which you damn I find the least bad’, he wrote on one of the rare occasions
he ever discussed pictures other than his own.1 And, in any case, Ricciardi lived in a
different town and could not therefore give him the personal patronage he wanted.
Thus Rosa, despite his immense, though fitful, artistic and social success, was rather
an isolated figure, proud and melancholic though buoyant, fiercely independent and
contemptuous of most of his fellow-artists, a failed intellectual painter whom no one
would take seriously and who was all too frequently confused with the bamhoccianti—
the very artists who most consistently rejected the elevated moral and poetic qualities
to which he so avidly aspired. It was in these circumstances that he found it necessary to
launch the onslaught on conventional patronage which has already been described: to
use every method open to him to impose the image of an intensely serious artist of a
wholly new kind.2 Failing to appeal to a select clientèle of fastidious tastes, he was
paradoxically forced to look beyond even the outer circles of contemporary patronage,
and thus, as Passeri points out in commenting on his situation, ‘by one of those strange
and unavoidable accidents that intervene in the affairs of this world, his pictures could
be seen not only in many houses belonging to gentlemen and princes but also in those
owned by “persone di mediocre stato” ’.3 It can scarcely have comforted this most
disdainful of artists to know that such pictures must have been of a higher quality than
any that had yet been seen in such humble dwellings, but perhaps, like Luca Giordano,
‘he used three brushes—one of gold to satisfy the nobility, one of silver for private
citizens, and one of copper for the populace’.4
1 De Rinaldis, 1939, p. 164—Letter ofZI May 1664.
2 See Chapter I.
3 Passeri, p. 396.
4 De Dominici, IV, p. 186.