# 05 CHP-5 sec iii

The self-made man, unaffected by the traditional values and culture of those called upon to rule, has often expressed an artistic taste offensive to the estabhshed canons.

[Page 132]
When not in a position to enforce such taste, his expression of it has been of little consequence. But when singly or in concert with his fellows he has become sufficiently influential to attract artists willing to gratify him, denunciations have been many and scathing. Such was the case in Baroque Italy. Beginning rather tentatively, the attacks on the ‘ignorant’, those who were not wellborn or true connoisseurs, mounted in violence as the numbers of such patrons increased. One fact was especially outrageous:
. the support that was won by the bambocciate, those little pictures which represented scenes from everyday life. Though this support eventually came from the highest ranks of society (an additional cause for indignation) there is reason to believe that it started with the ‘uomini di stato mediocre e di stato basso’. Certainly a desire for the more picturesque aspects of ‘reality’ in art has linked the uninitiated connoisseurs of many different civilisations, and has been met by artists ranging from the sublime to the abysmal. The history of the movement in seventeenth-century Rome is difficult to unravel, but its occasionally visible course throws light on many different aspects of patronage there.
The bamboccianti—so called in derision from the nickname given to their deformed leader Pieter van Laer—were (in the words of the critic Giambattista Passeri) opening a window on to life.1 What did they see out of it? Men at work—the cakeseller with his ring-shaped loaves; the water-carrier outside the walls of the town; the tobacconist filling the pipes of resting soldiers; the peasant feeding his horses; the smith. Men at play
—gulping down a quick drink at the inn but still on horseback to save time; dancing the tarantella before a group of admiring spectators; playing morra in an old cave; dressed in brilliant costumes for the carnival procession. Or a sudden glimpse of violence as the dandified brigand—plumed hat gay against the stormy sky, pistol about to fire— rides into the farm and terrorises the stable lad and his dog. Sometimes, but very rarely, the bamboccianti turn some simple scene from ordinary life into a story—an old donkey has died at last, fallen to the ground while still at work; the owner casts a last lingering look at the pathetic corpse as he carries away the saddle; his womenfolk give way to unconcealed grief. The one support of their livelihood has gone. What will they do now? Much more often an ostensibly ‘historical’ subject is treated as a setting for a realistic representation of everyday life. Erminia arrives distraught among the peasants and finds them milking the cows while the washing hangs out on a line outside the thatched cottage; John the Baptist preaches to a crowd of gossiping, dice-playing country-folk and soldiers. Such is the world of the bamboccianti in the ’thirties and
’forties.2 The setting is Rome and the campagna, but not the great city of the humanists and the tourists. It is a Rome where the broken column is used as a rough and ready chair or the foundation for a farm house; where the fragment of a classical statue lies unheeded beside a horse-trough; where buying and selling take place in dingy archways

[Page 133]
and side-streets and no one bothers to look at the soaring obelisks or fountains dimly visible in the distance. The characters are a satisfied and lively peasantry, hard working and sober, merging almost imperceptibly into an urban proletariat of reasonable prosperity.
The most regular condition of the Italian peasant’s life in the seventeenth century was one of extreme poverty punctuated by periods of real starvation. Grain shortages were endemic. Desperate and extraordinary measures totally failed to cope with them.
In 1648 free pardons were offered to the bandits who ravaged the campagna if only they would bring corn into Rome. Beggars roamed the streets often in organised bands held together by strange rituals. Epidemics threatened the population herded together in overcrowded hovels. At frequent intervals the Tiber burst its banks and devastating floods swept through the low-lying parts of the city. Unrest was always present; when the Pope died and Rome was only partially governed by authorities with temporary powers this permanent discontent would become crystallised. Crime assumed terrible proportions, libels and riots came out into the open; soldiers were stationed at strategic points to prevent the mob destroying the statue which only a few years earlier a sycophantic administration had erected to the Pope’s eternal memory. And the soldiers themselves who came in large numbers to protect the princes and cardinals as they assembled for the conclave took part in the riots and fought with the regular police appointed to keep order. But such violence was prevalent enough without the occasion of a vacant papacy to provide further stimulus. The French and the Spaniards attached to their respective embassies lived in a state of permanent tension: often this exploded into bloody riots which the armed police of the popes found exceedingly difficult to repress.1
All this violence and misery was recorded with monotonous regularity by contemporary diarists: yet wesind only the barest hint of it in those works of the bamboccianti which have come down to us and which tend to convey a picture of untroubled serenity. The view from their window was evidently a somewhat restricted one. We do not find in their works the distortions of Georges de la Tour or the brutality of Jacques
Callot; nor yet the vulgar buffoons that so many of their contemporaries accused them of putting into their pictures. It is certain that many bambocciate have not survived; yet few of those that have, or that are recorded in inventories, have that aggressively offensive character that their very vocal opponents claimed. How then should we interpret them? Certainly not as social protest. Only Michael Sweerts gives his peasants the dignity and monumentality that is almost polemically asserted by their contemporaries in the paintings of Le Nain or Velasquez. Such an attitude was scarcely conceivable in seventeenth-century Rome where cultivated society and all who aped it looked upon the poor with extreme distaste. Arcadian sentiment was a purely literary phenomenon with no repercussions as yet on actual social behaviour or inclinations.
‘It must not be imagined’, wrote Giovanni Battista Doni of contemporary operatic performances, ‘that the shepherds who are brought on to the stage are the sordid and

[Page 134]
vulgar fellows who look after the flocks these days... . Z1 There is much point in Salvator Rosa’s bitter protest about the welcome given to the bambocciate:
Cosi vivi mendichi affliti e nudi non trovan da coloro un sol danaro, che ne’ dipinti poi spendon gli scudi:
. Quel che aboriscon vivo, aman dipinto; perchè ornai nelle corti è vecchia usanza di aver in prezzo solamente il finto . .,2 -
‘What they abhor in real life they like to see in a picture’—within limits at least. The figures in the bambocciate are the ‘good poor’, and they are cut down to safely small proportions. Everyone insisted on this: ‘Every day’, wrote Passeri of Van Laer, ‘he would paint pictures of varying size but with small figures, about on e palmo (221 cm.) high—never any bigger.’3 Later the backgrounds were to increase—the Mils and the trees, the churches and palaces with great flights of steps and spacious colonnades were to assume overwhelming proportions and engulf the little beggars and shepherds who lay at their bases; and then the poor would become purely ‘picturesque’ additions to the setting. It is an attitude that is already implicit even in much of the earlier work of the bamboccianti.
None the less, Pieter Van Laer did introduce something quite new into Italian painting; he and Ms followers brought witMn the scope of art an enormous range of new material; Ms shepherds were not those ‘of the past when the profession was still a noble one’.4 There had been some precedents of course-—Bassano and Caravaggio perhaps, who are linked together m Bellori’s denunciation of the trend, but how much more satisfying they had been for the cultivated amateur ! And Caravaggio Mmself had never painted a secular pamting of ordmary people going about their ordinary occupations. The proletarian models of Ms earlier works, dazzlingly dressed or undressed, are clearly adapted to a sophisticated, not to say corrupt, taste. And the deeply moving peasants of Ms later pictures always take part in a conventional religious scene. But
Caravaggio’s was the spiritual and aesthetic revolution that cleared the ground for the bamboccianti. For the first time the poor emerge from a shadowy background and are given as much prominence as the great or the sacred. His immediate followers in Italy only rarely pursued the line of development implicit in tMs attitude. A sober appraisal of daily fife is not what we look for in their work, wMch recalls far more the fanciful and sometimes grotèsque mcidents of the picaresque novel. More significant had been some of the pictures of Anfflbale Carracci—the Beaneater in the Colonna gallery, for instance, or Ms drawings of the working classes at their daily occupations. But these

[Page 135]
had only been incidental to a far more orthodox career, as had all such ventures until now. Thus there were no real forerunners to the bamboccianti, and this absence was in itself a significant indication of some of the difficulties which were bound to face any artist interested in breaking away from the recognised categories of painting.
When Pieter Van Laer came to Rome in 1625 he was already 31 years old, and hence a fully mature painter. He had grown up in the Protestant town of Haarlem where a tradition of‘realistic’ painting was firmly established, free from the interference of aristocratic or idealistic prejudice. In Rome itself he associated with the newly formed schildersbent, and lived the typically ‘bohemian’ existence of its members. Thus by religion and social circumstances he was for some years at least totally cut off from official patronage. Unattached to the household of any prince or ambassador, he evidently sold his little scenes of peasant and animal life how and where he could—at the fairs of Corpus Domini, perhaps, and certainly to dealers.
Success came quite soon; within ten years he could ask 30/35 scudi a picture, an astonishingly high price, much more than many an established painter of the day could expect.1 Indeed Van Laer soon acquired a reputation, which he never lost, of being a very expensive artist. But it is difficult to find out exactly who bought his works.
Other painters, we are told, ‘even those of some reputation looked at his pictures with great delight, and tried to possess some for themselves as examples of how to express reality so well’.2 His Northern compatriots must have been in the forefront of these admirers; indeed we know that Hermann Swanevelt, the Dutch landscape painter, owned two.3 It is a greater surprise to find that Pietro Testa himself, in later years so scornful of realism in art, was in touch with the world of the early bamboccianti and may therefore have owned examples of their work.4 Quite soon the most influential patrons in Rome began to take a cautious interest in this new phenomenon. Niccolo Simonelli, the amateur dealer, a man very proud of his discernment as a collector, owned two for a short time—one showing a peasant with a lamb and a dog, the other a night scene— before exchanging them for something else.5 Vincenzo Giustiniani, the especial protector of Caravaggio’s Northern followers, acquired two rather uncharacteristic examples
—a Landscape with figures and animals and a small scene of St Eustace hunting—though he did not bother to frame them. Even Cassiano dal Pozzo seems to have been tempted and to have owned one painting by Van Laer. Finally about three years before leaving
Rome the artist dedicated a series of eight engravings of animals to Don Ferdinando

[Page 136]
Afan de Ribera, the Viceroy of Naples—but, as will become clear, the Spaniards were at all times closely associated with the success of the bamboccianti.
For all this success Van Laer himself probably remained on the outer fringes of society and we must assume that the bulk of his clientèle was not made up of the great princes and the learned patrons who figure so prominently in this story but was to be found rather among the anonymous ‘uomini di stato mediocre’ about whom we know so little. It is therefore a significant sign of the times that he was able to make such a great impact on painting in Rome and indeed Europe. By the time he left Rome in about 1639 he had proved that the demand for his little genre paintings was large and rewarding. There were many ready to exploit it.
Among these was Michelangelo Cerquozzi, a Roman by birth.1 He too probably began by selling his pictures cheaply to dealers before attracting the attention of connoisseurs. But his nationality, if nothing else, made his situation much easier and brought him into far closer contact with his patrons than had been possible for a foreigner such as Van Laer. Because of this, Cerquozzi’s life and work perfectly illustrate the limits within which a ‘realistic’ painter could express himself in the essentially aristocratic society of seventeenth-century Rome.
He too was much admired by his fellow-artists. His two closest friends were painters—Domenico Viola and Giacinto Brandi—and he was on excellent terms with
Pietro da Cortona. He was always generous with younger men and he went out of his way to encourage his potential rival Giacomo Borgognone. We also know that some of his most important admirers and patrons came from the professional classes. There was, for instance, the distinguished lawyer Raffaele Marchesi to whom he bequeathed some of his works, and the doctor Vincenzo Neri whom with a group of other friends he immortalised in one of his finest paintings (Plate 22a).2
Cerquozzi was soon taken up by some of the leading aristocratic families, but of a kind rather different from those who circled round the Barberini court and helped to spread the fame of artists such as Romanelli, Poussin and Testa. His first great successes were apparently painted for an official at the Spanish Embassy and it is possible that he may have been employed there at the very time that Velasquez came to stay as a guest of the Ambassador Monterey in 1630? There is also some evidence to suggest that both
Cerquozzi and Velasquez painted bambocciate for the most important of the Hispanophil clans in Rome, the Colonna, though this is more likely to have been during the great artist’s second visit.4 Certainly Cerquozzi’s career was closely linked to Spain and her.supporters, in . Rome. He himself used to wear Spanish dress, and until his later years.

[Page 137]
dlihC
dna
annodaM
:OtarrefossaS.b
stniaS
htiw
yrasoR
eht
fo
annodaM
:otarrefossaS
.

[Page 22]
a. Cerquozzi: The artist with a group of friends
b. Cerquozzi: The revolt of Masaniello

[Page 23]
a. Cerquozzi: Women’s bath
b. S R : The death of Regulus

[Page 24]
Salvator Rosa: Fortune

[Page 137]
nearly all his more important patrons were within the Spanish sphere of influence.
In 1647, for instance, he was collaborating with Jan Miel, Giacomo Borgognone and others on the illustration of the second volume of Famiano Strada’s De Bello Belgico, a celebration of Alessandro Farnese’s campaigns on behalf of the Spaniards in the Low
Countries; Cardinal Rapaccioli, who died in 1657, and who owned many of his pictures, was boycotted by the French in the conclave of 1655 because of his Spanish affiliations1; Monsignor Raggi, another of his admirers, was a Genoese and also devoted to the Spanish cause. So too was the Modenese Count Camillo Carandini.2
Whatever their political affiliations, most of these families showed a striking contrast in taste with the more cultivated Barberini circle. They tended to ignore the grander history painters and the noble balance between classicism and Venetian colour which these artists were fostering as well as the exuberance of the Baroque. Again and again we find them concentrating on landscape painters such as Gaspard Dughet or
Salvator Rosa as well as on other artists who specialised in subjects similar to those of
Cerquozzi—Jan Miel, for instance, or Giacomo Borgognone, the battle painter—and bamboccianti of later generations. Three of Cerquozzi’s most enthusiastic patrons, the
Counts Carpegna and Carandini and Monsignor Raggi, were all collectors of this type of picture.
And yet his success with the aristocratic society of Rome is certainly reflected in his art. As far as dating can be established at all, it seems that the small pictures with scenes from popular life belong mostly to his early years when he was closely following Van
Laer and largely working for dealers, but that later he turned more and more to much larger pictures, which were painted to commission, and that he then widened the range of his subject-matter. There is not much reason for believing that this change was the direct result, of specific pressures from his patrons, for we know that the more authentically popular and coarse bambocciate continued to fetch very high prices.3 Rather it seems to have sprung naturally from his closer association with them and, consequently, from a gradual acceptance of their values—a process not unknown among artists of all kinds since Cerquozzi’s day. It may not be extravagant to see his dilemma reflected in the manner of his private fife—the life of a man who painted the essentially antiSpanish common people for sympathisers with Spain4: careful and conscientious in his
Lotti of 1784. I am most grateful to the Marchesa Elisa Carandini for drawing my attention to this book.

[Page 138]
work, the friend of princes and prelates, yet coarse and vulgar in his speech; ordering a couple of artichokes on his deathbed ‘che io mi voglio saziare a mio modo’ in an almost symbolic last minute return to the popular Use he had so often depicted, and then buried with full pomp by the Accademia di S. Luca, by now the very stronghold of that classical idealism which he had seemed to thwart but which had perhaps thwarted him.1 In fact, once Cerquozzi was taken up by the Roman aristocracy it became almost impossible for him to paint the life of the very poor with sympathy and understanding.
This is apparent in his large still lifes with figures—lush clusters of grapes cascading down over prettified boys and girls, somewhat sentimentally or erotically posed.2 In these pictures he showed that he was quite prepared and able to move away from the direct observation of the Use which he saw around him ‘without any kind of alteration’
—the claim that Passeri made for Van Laer. Indeed, his reputation to some extent rested on the extraordinarily imaginative nature of his talents—his ability to paint scenes he had never actually witnessed himself. And these paintings could be admired by his contemporaries for certain purely aesthetic elements—‘that exquisite quality of his paint and colour which made it appear Eke crushed jewels’.3 This, presumably, was the appeal of his work to a cultivated connoisseur such as Cardinal Massimi, the admirer of
Claude, Poussin and Velasquez, but also the owner of four scenes of country life by
Cerquozzi.
Above all he specialised in battle pictures, a more respectable genre than bambocciate, and one in which his success is testified by the nicknameof‘Michelangelo delle Battaglie’.
His work in this field demonstrates the truth of Fritz Saxl’s subtle analysis of the ‘battle scene without a hero’—pictures painted for a society that was only indirectly affected by the wars that raged throughout Europe during most of the seventeenth century.4
Brilliantly dressed cavaliers charge at each other; solidly built horses collapse and trample soldiers underfoot; the air is fit up with the flames from discharged guns and smoke rises to the clouds; afterwards the dead are plundered, the wounded are treated, and couriers are sent off to announce victory. Victory for whom? That hardly mattered; the attraction of these pictures lay in the opportunity that they offered for vicarious participation in battles that were changing the shape of Europe far outside the backwater into which Italy had now sunk. Such detachment also played its part in stressing the
‘realism’ of the scene. The anti-heroic confusion, the smoke rising from distant battle­
- fields—at times these almost seem to foreshadow Stendhal’s equally incoherent, though far more subtle, view of Waterloo'. ' ............... ' ..............
Cerquozzi’s position was naturally affected by the death of Urban VIII, when exclusive French influence came to an end and his natural patrons, the Spanish party, began to occupy the centre of the stage. A crisis may have occurred in about 1648 when

[Page 139]
he probably painted one of his masterpieces The Revolt of Masaniello (Plate 22b). The circumstances are very mysterious and in many ways the picture marks something of a turning-point in his career, for such records of contemporary events were almost unknown in Italian art of the seventeenth century unless specifically associated with a particular patron.1 Who commissioned this remarkable picture? We only know that by the end of the century it belonged to the Spada collection.2 If it was actually painted for Cardinal Bernardino, who brought together most of the pictures in the palace, it must surely have had some political significance. For Spada who had been papal nunzio in Paris was firmly in the French camp. Indeed a few years later Mazarin told the supporters of France to vote for Spada in the conclave that followed the death of Innocent
X: but the plan came to nothing for the Spaniards used their veto.3 Cerquozzi, deeply committed to the Spanish cause, painting the spectacle of their most humiliating defeat for the most Francophil of Cardinals—it was typical of much in his career. The picture itself is inscrutable; never was Cerquozzi’s ‘neutrality’, his anti-heroic element, so much in evidence. Vividly it portrays the events of 7 July 1647 with the most scrupulous accuracy, a remarkable instance of objectivity exercised on a subject that stirred the passions of Europe.4 It has none of the melodramatic features that we find in the portraits of the fishmonger destined to pass into Neapolitan folk-art. Compared to the almost mediaeval vision of Cerquozzi’s contemporary Micco Spadaro who depicts
Masaniello like some early saint twice in the same canvas—in the background exhorting the crowd with his crucifix, in the foreground at the height of his power, in velvet headdress and white plumes on his way to visit the Spanish viceroy—the Roman seems cold and detached.5
With the Revolt of Masaniello probably began Cerquozzi’s main phase of collaboration with the architectural painter Viviano Codazzi who arrived in Rome from Naples towards the end of 1647 and who may well have supplied the eye-witness account on which the picture is based.6 The collaboration was of great importance because it confirmed Cerquozzi’s move away from the more simple and direct presentation of peasant life towards the grandiose and even the exotic. Some time after 1657, only three years before Cerquozzi’s death, the two artists painted several pictures for Cardinal
Flavio Chigi, nephew of Pope Alexander VII and consequently the most influential
. 3 Leman, pp. 13 if, and Hanotaux, p. 9...

[Page 140]
patron in Rome.1 Two os the works that Cerquozzi, now at the centre os the artistic scene, painted for him stand out for their curious subjects, about which we can only say that they are certainly not representations of anything seen in seventeenth-century Italy.
Indeed no actual villa or palace ever corresponded to the vast, fantastic structure that
Codazzi envisaged as the setting for Cerquozzi’s princely family in The Arrival at the
Palace, although these figures, with coach and horses, retinue and dogs, are acutely realised as, still more, are the peasants selling water melons or lounging on the ground unperturbed by the general grandeur. Still less plausible is the vaulted Women s Bath (Plate 23 a)—in itself a surprising choice for a cardinal, were it not for the fact that Chigi
‘only thought of hunting, of conversations and of banquets in order to overcome the venereal impulses which powerfully raged within him’.2 A turbaned Oriental wistfully surveys the scene while elegant young dandies prepare to make the most of the obvious opportunities that await them. Though the dress is certainly contemporary, the events described must surely refer obliquely to the notorious stufe of Renaissance Rome or perhaps evoke some traveller’s tales from the East. So far had Cerquozzi moved from his original inspiration.
The allurement of a predominantly aristocratic patronage was the most important but not the only obstacle that stood in the way of a school of ‘realistic’ painting in
Rome; there was also the antagonism to such painting expressed on theoretical grounds
—in some circles even before the arrival of Van Laer and. later to become a widely held dogma. This need not in itself have proved decisive, for the very bitterness with which contemporary writers reported the success of the bamboccianti shows that many patrons were far outside the reach of such theoretical considerations when buying pictures.
But it did serve to keep the bamboccianti in an inferior position from which they were always tempted to extricate themselves once they had achieved any success. Cerquozzi toyed with becoming a‘history painter’ and Jan Miel also found himself veering between a profitable bambocciante manner, which earned him discredit in the social circles to which he aspired, and the more acceptable branch of ‘history painting’ which was far less suited to his talents.
To a large extent the theoretical objections to the bamboccianti were the direct outcome of the very conditions which had made their success possible: the démocratisation of art and its wider response to a growing public. Rome in the seventeenth century was a society of constantly changing nouveaux-riches and parvenus desperately anxious to conceal the fact by marrying into the great old patrician families, now bereft of

[Page 141]
power and bankrupt. But an aristocratic taste had to be acquired as well as aristocratic relations, and the problem was not always as easy to solve. Again and again the attacks launched on the baniboccianti by other artists and theorists were deliberately designed to rub this sore spot of the new ruling class. The most powerful plea to snobbery was scarcely even concealed by more abstruse considerations. Admiration of the trivial world of Van Laer and Cerquozzi was contemptible because it was widespread, an attribute of the crowd rather than the connoisseur. All the still embryonic distinctions between the general public and the man of taste were pressed into service to discredit the movement, and in the course of these attacks the bambocciate were described in terms that often bore little resemblance to the actual pictures. And inevitably the onslaught grew more fierce as that more ‘liberal’ form of connoisseurship, which was one of the reasons for Cerquozzi’s success, became more widespread.
His early admission into the Accademia di S. Luca shows indeed that in the ’thirties there was no hostility from that quarter.1 The attacks seem rather to have reached their peak in the late ’forties and ’fifties, at the time when he was achieving his greatest triumphs. This was a period of acute financial depression, and no doubt the success of the baniboccianti was linked to their considerably cheaper prices in the struggle for survival. Indeed this is one of the charges specifically brought against them by the many artists who were among their most ferocious enemies. Guido Reni (who died in 1642) was among the first of these, but the terms in which he expressed his hatred of the movement make it reasonably clear that his biographer Passeri was attributing some of his own feelings to the master.2
In 1651 came a famous exchange of letters between Andrea Sacchi and Albani.3
The Roman artist wrote to his ageing master in Bologna to tell him of the success of the baniboccianti and to ask for his opinion on the matter. This came quickly enough in the form of a stream of abuse. But though the correspondence has always been treated as of cardinal importance in the history of the movement, in fact its significance is not altogether clear. When Sacchi wrote to Albani of this new and deplorable phenomenon, the bamboccianti had already been painting for a quarter of a century. And the reference to their earning six or eight scudi for a picture is absurd, as both artists must have known.4
Long before this the leading figures had been charging several times that sum. Though
Albani and Sacchi no doubt held the hostile views attributed to them, it seems quite possible that the letters themselves were carefully doctored by their not very scrupulous editor Malvasia. Two points, however, stand out: that intense hatred for the bamboccianti developed relatively'late, when for the first time they were being taken seriously by the grandest patrons, and that financial questions played a considerable part in their success and in the opposition they aroused.

[Page 142]


**Footnotes:**
1 Passeri, p. 72: ‘. . . egli [Van Laer] era singolare nel rapresentar la verita schietta, e pura nell’esser suo, die li suoi quadri parcvano una finestra aperta, per la quale si fussero veduti quelli suoi successi senza alcun divario, et alteratione... . .’
2 For a general survey see introduction by Giulio Brigand to I Bamboccianti exhibition, Rome 1950.
1 Gigli passim, especially pp. 77, 162, 290, 324-5.
1 G. B. Doni, II, p. 16: '. . . non debbiamo immaginarci, che i Pastori, che s’introducono, siano di questi sordidi, e volgari, che oggi guardone il bestiame... . .'
2 Rosa; Della Pittura, lines 255-8 and 262-5.
3 Passeri, p. 72.
4 Continuation of quotation in note 1, above: ‘ma quelli del secolo antico, nel quale i più nobili esercitavono quest’arte’.
1 In 1636 two small paintings by Van Laer were worth 32 scudi—see note 3, below.
2 Passeri, p. 74. ' ' ' ' ’ Lely seems to have been an admirer, for in his sale catalogue (Burlington Magazine, 1943, pp. 185-191) various genre scenes are attributed to ‘Bamboots’. For the reactions of painters to other bamboccianti see Baldinucci, VI, 1728, pp. 602-4.
3 Bertolotti: Artisti belgi c olandesi, pp. 127 If., reports the case brought by Swanevelt against Francesco Catalano of Benevento whom he accused of stealing two pictures by Van Laer. The testimony provides much useful information about the artist’s circumstances.
4 ibid., p. 134.
5 ibid., p. 133. Another friend and admirer of Van Laer was the Roman merchant Bernardino Lorca—see letter of Sebastiano Resta dated 27 February 1704 published by Bottari, II, p. 106.
1 See the lives of Cerquozzi by Passeri and Baldinucci and also his will published by Bertolotti in Arte e Storia, V, 1886, p. 22. 2 ibid.
3 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 190. It is however exceedingly unlikely that this early work was painted in 1615 when the artist was aged only 15. Van Laer did not come to Rome until 1624. The significance of Cerquozzi for Velasquez was pointed out by Roberto Longhi in 1950, and though his attribution to Velasquez of the so-called ‘Rissa all’ambasciata di Spagna’ is not altogether convincing, the general point is valid, and it is perfectly reasonable to assume that the two men may have met at the Spanish Embassy.
4 In Ghezzi’s notes on the Colonna collection (see p. 125, note 1) there is a reference to Due bambocciate di Velasco. Cerquozzi certainly painted a good deal for the Colonna—see Ferdinando Colonna.
1 In 1654-5 the French Ambassador reported that Rapaccioli was 'autant Espagnol que Cardinal’— Valsrey, p. 220.
2 Raggi’s patronage of Cerquozzi is mentioned by Baldinucci and is confirmed by the fact that in 1701 the Marchese Raggi lent ‘cinque quadri bellissimi bislunghi tutti d’una misura’ by the artist to the exhibition at S. Salvatore in Lauro—Ghezzi papers in the Museo di Roma;  ' Conte Camillo Carandini (1619-1663) is referred to briefly in the history of the family by G. A.
3 Even in Florence the Marchese Filippo Corsini was proud to own a painting by Jan Miel of a ‘barone, che in atto di sedere, attraversatosi aile ginocchia un piccolo fanciullo, con un certo suo straccio gli toglie 1’immondezza dalla deretana parte’—Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 368.
4 In 1642 Amayden reported that on the French side were the ‘bottegari e Gente bassa’ and on the Spanish side the ‘Gentiluomini e cittadini più onorati’—Relazione della Citti di Roma fatta nell’Anno 1642— MS. hi Biblioteca Casanatense, Rome, 5001. Amayden was a Spanish protégé and this should be borne in mind when evaluating his report.
1 Passeri, p. 289.
2 Briganti, 1954, pp. 47-52.
3 Passeri, p. 288.
4 Saxl.
1 The most extraordinary case of such a painting is The Death of Wallenstein by Pietro Paolini—see -- Marabottini, 1963.
2 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 192, says only: ‘si vede nel Palazzo del Bali Spada... .’.
4 There are a number of accounts of Masaniello’s revolt, but for the immediate impact it made in Rome at the time see the dispatches of Cardinal Filomarino published in Archivio Storico Italiano, IX, 1846, pp. 379-3935 Micco Spadaro’s pictures are in the Museo di S. Martino, Naples.
6 To claim as Professor Longhi and Estella Brunetti (1958, p. 311) have done that Codazzi was painting with Cerquozzi and others in Rome between 1625 and 1635 is to fly in the face of Codazzi’s own words of 1636: ‘Io venni dalla predetta mia patria [Bergamo] da quindici anni e venni in Napoli, et sempre ho abitato in Napoli al Baglivo’—Prota-Giurleo, p. 77. None of Dr Brunetti’s evidence, stylistic or documentary, seems to me to be really conclusive and I can see no reason for not assuming that the collaboration between the two artists began in Rome after 1647.
1 Once again it cannot be conclusively proved that the two pictures, along with a number of others recorded by contemporary sources and still in the collection of the Chigi descendants, were actually painted for Cardinal Chigi although all writers of the time refer to his owning them and they are listed in his inventories. There is, however, no document showing any actual payment to Cerquozzi and it is just conceivable—though most unlikely—that these pictures also were painted for the Colonna and then acquired with many others by the Chigi in 1661 when they bought the palace (later Palazzo Odescalchi) at SS. Apostoli with all its contents from the Colonna—Golzio, 1939, p. 3.
2 From a report by Ferdinando Raggi, Genoese diplomatic agent in Rome quoted by Achille Neri, 1883.
1 Hoogewerff, 1913, p. 50.
2 Passeri, p. 96.
3 Malvasia, II, pp. 179 ff.
4 Between 1646 and 1648, for instance, Don Antonio Ruffo bought a battle picture by Cerquozzi, size 4x6 palmi, for 80 ducats. By 1671 a Van Laer, size 4 palmi, was valued at 3 50 ducats—Ruffo, p. 189.
1 Passeri, p. 388. It was Simonelli who in 1638 arranged for the exhibiting of Rosa’s Tityus at the Pantheon.
2 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 191.
3 The date of Rosa’s satire on Painting is not certain. It was mentioned for the first time in a letter of 1651 and may have been written in Florence. For an analysis see Limentani, 1961, pp. 163-79.
4 Letter from Salvator Rosa to G. B. Ricciardi dated 2 April 1660—de R...Jdis, 1939, p. 109.
5 See the lives of Rosa by Passeri and Baldinucci.
6 Shaftesbury, Second Characters, p. 15. As far as I am aware this interesting passage has never been noticed by art historians.