# 06 CHP-6 sec iv

While grandiose schemes of this kind could still occasionally be promoted by the nobility, the more subtle and discriminating patronage of contemporary art, which had been such an important feature of earlier years, now began to decline in significance.
-Cardinal Massimi has already been discussed, but he was an exceptional figure. More characteristic of the second half of the century were a number of scholars and men of letters who projected into their art collecting their predominantly literary interests.
The strangest of all these collectors was the antiquarian and local historian Antonio degli Effetti.2 His pictures have disappeared, and thus our knowledge of his taste can

[Page 157]
There is no doubt that Antonio degli Effetti revelled in the literary possibilities of such a gallery. But, in general, the artists represented were so modest—many have fallen into , total obscurity—that we can certainly accept the truth of his claims. Of established painters only Pietro da Cortona and Carlo Maratta, with one picture each, were included. The' others were' meri like' Bernardino Gagliardi, Francesco' Allegrini and; above all, a great number of Flemish artists. The minor reputations of these painters and the small dimensions of the pictures doubtless brought them within the range even of a man as obsessed with the benefits of poverty as was Antonio degli Effetti.
Another interesting patron and collector was the Florentine Francesco Marucelli,
I have used the English version by H. E. Seebohm, Chipping Campden, 1906.

[Page 158]
who lived in the piazza di Spagna.1 Books were his real passion and he amassed a considerable library which he recorded in a work of a great scholarly erudition. But he also showed a keen interest in the arts of his day. He wrote the lives of some of the principal painters, many of whom were his friends, and he sent details about artists working in Rome to Filippo Baldinucci when that scholar was writing lais great history of Italian art. His patronage shows an inconsistency which is characteristic of the breakdown of taste which occurred in the second half of the seventeenth century but which is
’ certainly refreshing when compared to the arid pedantry of many of his contemporaries.
On the one hand he commissioned busts in stucco, wood, marble and paint of the great writers whose works fdled his excellent library; on the other, he delighted in the bambocciate of the Flemish painter Theodor Helmbrecker whose most enthusiastic admirer he was and who painted sixteen pictures for him, some of them scenes of country life and some with a hint of allegory.2
And a third and more modest of these scholarly collectors was a certain Luigi
Adami. He too was keen to obtain portraits of the most significant men in history. In
1667 we find him writing that he has just obtained pictures of Lord Essex and‘Francesco
Drach’ among the English as well as distinguished Germans, Spaniards, French and
Portuguese. And he observed sententiously that ‘there is no history which does not provide me with some flower capable of delighting the eye of the curious with the beauty of its colour and reviving the spirit of the idle with the strength of its perfume’.3
But all these men, and others like them, are interesting more for themselves than because they play any significant part in the history of painting. Not one of them was able through a combination of wealth, intellect and taste to influence the development of art. That role was now taken over from the patron by the critic. Indeed to some extent the growing importance of the latter was the direct result of the fall of the former.
The most important of all the Roman critics who began to make their influence
. felt in the second half of the seventeenth century was Gian Pietro Bellori.4 He was born in about 1615 and was said to be the nephew of the antiquarian collector and writer
Francesco Angeloni who was certainly his guardian. In Angeloni’s house Bellori could see Annibale Carracci’s drawings for the Farnese Gallery and could meet Domenichino from whom he took lessons. At an early date he became an active member of the
Accademia di S. Luca, but instead of practising art he began to write about it, at first
— rather haphazardly and then with growing assurance. Like Angeloni he devoted much of his time to the study of antiquity, but he also watched contemporary developments with keen interest. He drew up a catalogue of some of the leading Roman collections, and in 1664 he delivered a lecture to the Accademia on the ‘Ideal’ in art. He was already engaged in writing the Lives of a number of important painters and when he published

[Page 159]
these in 1672 he included his lecture of some years earlier as a preface to the book. From then onwards he was a dominant figure in artistic circles, more influential, both in the short and the long run, than the Jesuits, the popes or any of the other bodies which are held to have moulded stylistic developments.
For Bellori, unlike these others, had an absolutely consistent point of view which he expressed with clarity and authority.1 It is this last feature which makes him so important, for his views in themselves were derived from many different sources, and he was more of a transmitter than an originator. Bellori broke with the archistorical tradition that had been established by Vasari and feebly continued into the seventeenth century by Baglione. He did not aim at completeness either in his selection of artists or in his accounts of their lives or yet in his listing of their works. He ruthlessly subordinated studio gossip and even serious biographical information to a critical examination of what he regarded as the most significant achievements of the seventeenth century.
His criterion of judgement was based on the concept of the Ideal as it had already been elaborated by pioneers such as Monsignor Agucchi. After the Renaissance, art had degenerated into senseless mannerism from which it had eventually been rescued by
Annibale Carracci and his Bolognese followers. They had turned back to nature and also to a profound study of the antique and of the great masters, especially Raphael.
For extreme naturalism was just as dangerous as extreme mannerism. The Lives had an enemy—Caravaggio—though one whom Bellori was compelled to respect, for he was a sensitive judge of quality as well as a deeply intelligent man. But, fortunately, there were also heroes—Domenichino, from whom he had once taken lessons, and
Nicolas Poussin, his great friend, who unquestionably inspired many of the ideas in the book. It was, therefore, the ‘classical’ qualities in his contemporaries and predecessors that he singled out for praise. The sculptor Algardi was given a full-scale life; Bernini a few casual mentions. He wrote, but was unable to publish, a Use of Andrea Sacchi;
Pietro da Cortona was wholly ignored. But of all the artists of his time it was Carlo
Maratta, Sacchi’s pupil, who most appealed to him. In 1652 he helped to get Maratta one of his first important commissions and in later years he had his portrait painted by the artist, whose reputation he did everything he could to promote.2 It was to Bellori that Maratta and his pupil Giuseppe Chiari went for iconographical and no doubt other advice when given difficult commissions.3 The devout love for Raphael that both men felt was genuinely, if unfortunately, expressed by Maratta’s restoration of the frescoes in the'Vatican and the Farnesina and Bellori’s Descrizione delle Immagini dipinte da
Raffaello d’ Urbino. Furiously he attacked those who refused to subscribe to the'cult, and he wrote sarcastically of ‘some people who in their schools and their books teach that
Raphael is dry and hard, that his manner is statuine (a word that has come into the language in our own day), and who claim that he had no fire or spirit [furia o fierezza di Spirito]’.4 In passages like this he was at once preparing the way for neo-classicism

[Page 160]
and doing everything that he could to oppose a rival view of art that was soon to gain ground in much of Europe—a love for brio, the unfinished, the sketchy, the belle matière. In a later chapter it will be shown that it was, in fact, partly owing to the overriding influence of Bellori that this view made few converts in Rome.
It is a strange experience to confront Bellori’s words, which when taken up by followers hardened into dogma for over a century, with the paintings of his favourite
, Maratta. To us his watered-down versions of the Baroque bear little relation to the classical ideal of antiquity or Raphael; none the less when compared to the high Baroque of Pietro da Cortona or Gaulli the move towards simplicity and respect for the rules is obvious. Indeed the hostile reception that Gaulli’s frescoes in the Gesù met with in certain circles1—‘all the artists concluded that [the vault] would be beautiful if the proportions of the painting were less inaccurate and by someone else’—was no doubt due in part to the classicising influence of Bellori, and in his subsequent works Gaulli himself adopted a far more classical style. Artists from other cities, particularly Naples, were generally scorned in Rome and, if they came to work there, were compelled to regularise their style in conformity with the prevailing dogmas. And the rise of articulate criticism had another effect. More than ever before there was a widely held sentiment that art was not what it had been. ‘All over Europe there is a shortage of good artists and even in Flanders there are no longer the painters that there once were’, wrote
Jacomo di Castro in 1670, echoing a general feeling.2 In part this was merely the recognition of what was an undoubted fact; but in part it reflected the growing attention being paid to critics such as Bellori.
His influence grew with the years. In 1671 he was made secretary of the Accademia di S. Luca and not long after he was appointed librarian and antiquarian to Queen
Christina of Sweden. This extraordinary figure, ‘cross-backed . . . [with] a double
Chin strew’d with some long Hairs of Beard’, weirdly dressed in a man’s cloak and wearing a cravat round her neck,3 had first come to Rome in 1655 after her sensational conversion to Catholicism at the age of 28. Apart from voyages, which were frequently lengthy, to France and Sweden, she remained in the city until her death in 1689. She soon intrigued, and sometimes horrified, society by the eccentricity of her behaviour, but none the less began to exert great influence in political, literary and artistic circles.
In the palazzo Riario on the Lungara she displayed the marvellous collection of pictures which her father Gustavus Adolfus had looted from Prague—Raphael, Titian, Correg-
- - gio, Veronese, Rubens and other old masters.4 It was, however, a sign of the times that artists in Rome no longer possessed the creative vitality to make use of these in the way that a previous generation had drawn inspiration from the Aldobrandini Titians.
In her patronage of contemporaries Christina was not very imaginative nor did she have much scope. She particularly admired Pierfrancesco Mola, the most genuine heir to the

[Page 161]
Venetian tradition, and his pupil, Antonio Gherardi, another special devotee of Venetian colour. When she let herself be guided by Bellori, the results were different, for he encouraged her to patronise one of Domenichino’s most faithful pupils and a protege of his own, Gianangelo Canini.1 In fact, however, the Queen’s patronage of living painters was oflittle significance and her influence made itself felt far more in the literary field, where it led eventually to the formation of the Society of Arcadia a year after her death. ,

**Footnotes:**
157 be derived only from the catalogue that he himself drew up. Doubts have even been expressed as to whether he owned, rather than imagined, some of the pictures he mentions, but we have independent evidence that he was known as a collector. To foreign travellers Antonio’s Studiolo might appear to consist of little more than ‘petites peintures, mignatures, pierres précieuses, et autres bijoux’.1 For himself its significance was very much greater and of a totally different order. Antonio was above all a man of letters and he had been deeply impressed by a Platonic dialogue called The Table, at the time attributed to a Theban disciple of Socrates called Cebes.2 The vogue of this work, which later caught the fancy of Lord Shaftesbury, was largely due to Agostino Mascardi, a well-known Professore d’Eloquenza at Rome University under Urban VIII, who had translated it with an extremely long commentary in 1629. It purports to describe a picture, which represents an allegory of human life, found by two travellers in front of the temple of Kronos. A stranger explains the details of the picture, pointing out the follies of vice and false values and the rewards of virtue; neither in form nor in content does the dialogue show much originality. But ever since the Renaissance patrons and artists had eagerly seized on descriptions of antique pictures, and it is easy to understand the appeal to the erudite Antonio degli Effetti of such a neglected and recherche example. He had a version of it reproduced at the entrance of his gallery and most of the pictures he owned were designed to illustrate its lessons. Antonio (as was natural in a scholar) seized on one of these especially. ‘Consider how often a man is to be found possessed of wealth, but living an evil and wretched life..... Wealth is not a good thing if it does not help men to be better.’ Virtually all the artists he employed were required to illustrate the effects of wealth on man’s destiny. But just as many seventeenth-century poets, and in particular Marino, were so taken with the elaboration of their metaphors that they ignored their original purpose and continued to enrich them to the detriment of the theme, so Antonio degli Effetti clearly took delight in the idea of wealth for its own sake with or without moral implications. The Bible, ancient literature and history,- as well as sixteenth-century poetry, were all indiscriminatelyransacked for suitable chances to portray gold and precious jewels. King Midas hung near The Feast of Cleopatra, Armida next to Danae and The Judgement of Paris.
1 Spon and Wilder, I, p. 232.
2 In fact the Pinax is by a totally different author and probably dates from the first century' A.D.
1 For the life of Marucelli see the introduction by Guido Biagi to his Mare Magnum.
2 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 597.
3 Abbate Michele Giustiniani, I, p. 336.
4 For the life of Bellori see Donahue, 1946.
1 For the literature on Bellori’s critical theories see Schlosser Magnino.
2 Bellori, 1942, p. 99.
3 ibid., p. 92, and Pascoli, I, p. 211. 4 Bellori, 1942, p. 115.
1 See the avvisi published in Roma, XIX, 1941, p. 392.
2 In a letter to Don Antonio Ruffo of 20 September 1670 published by V. Ruffo, 1916, p. 290.
3 Skippon, p. 676, and Misson, 1717, II, p. 167.
4 Bildt, 1904, pp. 989-1003.
1 Pascoli, I, p. 124, and II, pp. 119 and 290.
3 Bellori, 1942, pp. 91-4 and, for the work by Berrettoni in the palace, A. Clark, 1961, pp. 190-3.
4 Pascoli, I, p. 140.