# 06 CHP-6 sec i

N August 1645, a little more than a year after the death of Pope Urban VIII, Poussin
Iwrote to his Parisian patron Chantelou, who was trying to buy some antique marbles, that ‘things in Rome have greatly changed under the present papacy and we no longer enjoy any special favour at court’.1 But it was not only French interests that suffered with the election of the Hispanophil Giambattista Pamfili as Innocent X. The arts as a whole received a blow which had the most lasting consequences. Many factors were involved, great and small: the European balance of power and the political ambitions of a single family; economic collapse and individual quirks of temperament; plague, starvation, sudden death and changes of fashion.2
The decline had already begun some three years earher with the outbreak of the
War of Castro, a little town belonging to the Duke of Parma but situated well within papal territory.3 A series of financial disputes with the Duke led to his excommunication and the rapid occupation of the town. But the campaign which had begun so well suddenly changed its nature when France, Tuscany, Venice and Modena banded together, either openly or in private, to put an end to what had now become an ambitious Barberini scheme to extend their private dominions. Don Taddeo showed his disastrous limitations as commander-in-chief; foreign troops once more marched on
Rome and the,panic of a second 1527 swept through the city. New taxes were raised, private silver was confiscated. This was hardly the moment for artistic patronage. In
March 1644 a humiliating peace was signed, and, soon after, Urban VIII died amid the ' execration of his subjects.4
The Conclave that followed was particularly stormy. In Rome armed guards were called in to defend the principal palaces from roaming mobs, and clashes were frequent.
The civic authorities made a feeble attempt to take over responsibility, only to be overruled by the College of Cardinals. The Pope who emerged from all this confusion,
Innocent X, was inclined neither by race—he was a Roman, a nationality notorious to this day for its lack of interest in the arts—nor by his financial situation—wholly chaotic after twenty years of Barberini extravagance—nor yet by personal temperament to continue the sumptuous patronage that had distinguished the previous reign. Only ambition remained; and here he faced a difficult problem. For he had only one nephew,

[Page 147]
Camillo. Should this young man of 22 be given political power in the only manner possible by being made a cardinal or should he be encouraged to marry and found a princely dynasty? The Pope hesitated, and then decided that the second course was the right one. An outsider was brought in as Secretary of State, while, undeterred by the disastrous failure of Taddeo Barberini, Camillo was made commander-in-chief of all the land and sea forces and governor of the more important strong points. Hardly had this been settled when the plan was changed. In November, only two months after these arrangements, Camillo was made Cardinal nephew and given a pile of benefices. He began his duties as legate at Avignon with some enthusiasm, which rapidly decreased when he found that the Pope and the already appointed Secretary of State firmly retained all serious political authority in their own hands. And so, once again, he changed his mind and in 1647 he went through the almost unheard-of procedure of resigning his cardinalate and marrying. In these complicated manœuvres he had been alternatively encouraged and thwarted by his formidable mother, the Pope’s sister-in-law, Donna
Olimpia Maidalchini. This legendary figure, whose dominating position in Innocent X’s court, led to endless scandals and ferocious quarrels, was shrewd, greedy and ambitious.
Above all she was excessively jealous of anyone replacing her as the first lady in Rome, and she showed her displeasure at Camillo’s marriage by making sure that neither he nor his wife should be allowed into the city.1
All this will have made it clear that for some years Camillo Pamfili was in no position to replace Francesco Barberini as the leading art patron in Rome. The Barberini themselves fled when an investigation of their incomes was threatened and the 17-y earold Francesco Maidalchini who was chosen by his aunt Donna Olimpia to supersede
Camillo as papal nephew was clearly not destined to make an impact on Roman culture.
Thus it was the Pope himself who directed what patronage there was. He was determined on two things: to erect the usual great family palace and ecclesiastical buildings and to make as little use as possible of the artists most closely associated with his predecessor. Pietro da Cortona carried on working for the Oratorians; Bernini undertook his first large private commission for a generation—the Cornaro chapel in
S. Maria della Vittoria with the famous St Theresa—and expressed the bitterness of his feelings in a group of Time unveiling Truth. His official career reached its lowest point when, under the chairmanship of the Pope, a special committee decided to pull down the first oflhe two proposed campaniles which he had added to the façade of St Peter’s for Urban VIII. His place as leading, architect was taken by two men—Girolamo
Rainaldi, a totally unfashionable figure nearly thirty years older than himself, and
Francesco Borromini, his hated rival. Rainaldi planned the vast palace on the Piazza
Navona where Innocent had lived as a cardinal, and Borromini took over the complete remodelling of St John Lateran, the Cathedral of Rome, whose decrepit and still largely mediaeval condition was the more glaring by contrast with the splendour of Urban
VIII’s decoration of St Peter’s. Both these major works were somewhat ‘reactionary’ in

[Page 148]
character, as were most of those created under Innocent’s auspices—the family palace because of Girolamo Rainaldi’s age and limitations, the church because of the inhibiting instructions given to Borromini. These will not at once be apparent to the visitor struck by the dazzling white interior of the Lateran basilica and the fantasy of its ornamentation which, as he will subsequently learn, replaces frescoes by Gentile da Fabriano and
Pisanello destroyed during the rebuilding. In fact, however, Borromini, the most daring of Baroque architects, was told to preserve the essential structure of the old
' basilica and thus had to use his brilliantly imaginative gifts on decoration rather than on the designing of a wholly new cathedral. Moreover, the financial troubles which afflicted Innocent’s reign made it impossible for him to replace the sixteenth-century wooden ceiling with the vault that he had planned.1
Bernini also lost his position as the most favoured sculptor of the day and was replaced by Alessandro Algardi, who not only made busts of Innocent and Donna
Olimpia, but was given vital commissions in St Peter’s and in the construction of a villa for the Pope’s family. In all these he moved away from the warmth and vigour typical of Bernini and adopted a colder, more classical manner that fitted in well enough with the disillusioned atmosphere of the ’forties. In fact, however, Bernini’s achievements and reputation were too great for him to be neglected for long, and with his
Fountain of the Four Rivers in the Piazza Navona, the square that Innocent made the centre of his patronage, he climbed back quickly to savour though not yet to his previous position of complete authority.2
It was not until the end of 1651, seven years after the change of papacy, that Pietro da Cortona was given his first official commission—to fresco the ceiling of the gallery in the papal palace in the Piazza Navona. The palace itself had been assigned to yet another substitute for a true papal nephew, Camillo Astalli, inevitably a relation of
Donna Olimpia, who added to the general confusion by calling himself Pamfili. But the actual choice ofPietro da Cortona may, perhaps, reflect the reviving fortunes of the authentic Prince CamiUo Pamfili, the only member of the family to show a keen interest in the arts and to have any real taste. After a series of inconclusive skirmishes with his mother, Prince Pamfili finally returned to Rome and was received by the Pope early in 1651. His ‘exile’ had not been very arduous or painful. During the course of it he had been responsible for the construction by Algardi of one of the most magnificent of all
Roman villas. This he filled with antiquities and had lavishly decorated. In Rome he
- - now set about building a palace for himself opposite the Collegio Romano for which he employed Antonio del Grande, and he also took in hand a number of other projects, both public and private. Indeed, after his return to the city artistic Use notably revived from the torpor which had been so evident during the earliest years of Innocent X’s reign, and some of the most beautiful and familiar achievements of the Roman Baroque

[Page 149]
were created—Pietro da Cortona’s frescoes of Scenes from the Aeneid in the gallery of the papal palace, and Borromini's dome and façade of the adjoining S. Agnese.1
Yet, despite all this, neither now nor later did Prince Pamfili prove a satisfactory art patron. He was an amiable man, but very lazy and uncultivated and much more interested in riding than any other activity.2 Above all he was mean. ‘Though he, more than anyone of his time, gave opportunities to painters and sculptors,’ wrote Passeri soon after his death,3 ‘he was always having trouble with them over questions of money.’ Pierfrancesco Mola painted frescoes for his palace at Valmontone which were pulled down and replaced by others by Mattia Preti after one such dispute.4 Both the sculptors Francesco Baratta and Ercole Ferrata were involved in prolonged financial difficulties with Pamfili and his heirs, and other artists also suffered complications of the same kind.5 Only in his support of Bernini’s S. Andrea al Quirinale, begun after the death of his uncle, did-Prince Pamfili display the enlightened generosity that had marked the rule of the Barberini. So that although many very fine artists were employed by him in enterprises of the greatest distinction, his patronage was never very inspiring.6
The reasons for this, however, were not wholly personal, for from the ’forties onwards the economic climate became ever more menacing... - ii -
The difficulties facing the student of papal finances are as insuperable today as they were in the seventeenth century. That the basic resources were vast is shown by the repeated recovery and aggrandisement of Rome long after every observer had noted impending disaster. Yet expenses too were on a huge scale and a pope sensitive to change and anxious to maintain his prestige was bound to try and cut them down.
Urban VIII had begun his rule with assurances to this effect, but had followed them up with unparalleled expenditure. When he died he left the Treasury hopelessly indebted and it never fully recovered. It took about two generations for the situation to become clear to everybody, but already under.Innocent X some steps had to be taken. As always they were only fitful and did nothing to remedy the real troubles facing Rome. Indeed this was hardly possible. For apart from local difficulties such as a disastrous drought, the expensive, though victorious, second War of Castro and repeated financial scandals in the court itself, the papal states were more and more affected by the general collapse of the Italian economy which reached its climax in the middle of the century, due largely To competition from England, France and Holland.7 In Rome itself, where
' 1 Pietro di Cortona’s frescoes'were painted Between 1651 and 1654—see'Brigand,’1962, p. 146.
Borromini took over the building of S. Agnese in Piazza Navona from the Rainaldis in 1653—see
Wittkower, 1958, p. 141.

[Page 150]
trade and industry were negligible, the effects were only indirect. Gradually, however, the tributes from abroad, upon which the city had always relied, began to dry up, and the process was intensified as mercantilist doctrines made headway. ‘Today’, wrote the
Venetian ambassador in 1660,1 ‘there is no ruler who does not look to the good of his own subjects and who does not therefore prevent the incomes from ecclesiastical benefices (especially the richest ones) from leaving his territory and being enjoyed by foreigners. At Rome they put up with their disappointment in patience so as not to have to face worse troubles.’ But these troubles came none the less.
Meanwhile sudden and improvised taxes were imposed and in the general hardship that resulted the public naturally began to resent the vast sums that were being spent on building and decorating the papal palaces and squares. As the magnificent reconstruction of the Piazza Navona proceeded, notes with poignant and bitter little rhymes were found attached to the stones2:
Noi volemo altro che Guglie, et Fontane,
Pane volemo, pane, pane, pane.
This was not a hint that the Pope and his courtiers were at all likely to take, for the grandiose adornment of Rome was far too deep rooted an ambition to be deterred by such considerations as a starving population. As often happens in such situations it was smaller scale enterprises that suffered rather than the vast showy undertakings. In 1648 the Accademia di S. Luca, which only a few years earlier had been so well endowed by the Barberini, faced great difficulties. The director‘did everything to restore its fortunes, and proposed many sound arrangements, but only a few of them were carried out.. ,’.3
At first minor, but later quite well established, artists began to suffer. Mattia Preti found many of them unemployed when he came to Rome in the middle ’forties.4 It was now that dealers began to play an important role and that the first serious complaints began to be made about the comparative success of the bamboccianti.
As a final economy measure; and one which in its squalid avarice-and feuds symbolises much of Innocent X’s reign, Donna Olimpia and Prince Camillo Pamfili refused to pay for a coffin for the Pope when he died in January 1655. While the corpse lay rotting in a cellar, mother and son quarrelled over who should be charged for the burial.
‘He says that he has never received anything from His Holiness... . . She replies that she is not the heiress... . .’5 The accession of Fabio Chigi as Pope Alexander VII at least removed the personal obstacles that stood in the way of enlightened patronage. He was a direct descendant of the faibiilou’sly rich Sienese banker Agostino ‘il Magnifico’ whose friendship with Raphael was legendary and whose fife he himself had written.6 Before spending thirteen years as Papal Legate in Cologne he had been the intimate friend of

[Page 151]
the circle of poets, intellectuals and artists which gravitated round the court of Urban
VIII. He was therefore deeply cultivated and he at once showed that he intended to fulfil the high hopes that were aroused by his distinguished ancestry and associations.
On the very day of his election he summoned Bernini to tell him of his ambitious plans for St Peter’s and to order him to continue the work he had already begun on the family chapel in S. Maria del Popolo.1 During the twelve years of Alexander’s pontificate
Bernini enjoyed once again the complete supremacy that had been his under Urban
VIII, and he put it to even more spectacular use. For the new Pope seemed to be making a deliberate attempt to undo the eleven-year interruption of Innocent X and to resume the projects of Urban.2 Once more St Peter’s returned to the centre of the scene.
Bernini crowned his life’s work there by erecting in the apse the Apostle’s chair in an overwhelmingly rich decor of golden putti and Doctors of the Church. A mystical and expressionist element which had first entered his work after the death of Urban VIII was here turned to dramatic use. Light streams through the window and takes corporeal shape in the gilt stucco rays, clouds and putti which converge round it and are at the same time forced by the violence of the centrifugal pressure to break through the classical framework of the architecture. At the base of the Chair itself, guarded by angels bearing the palms of martyrdom, the Doctors are frenziedly distorted by the tense, quivering and yet ascetic passions that rage through their bodies—such nervous religious energy had not been seen in Italian art since the work of those Milanese painters who had been inspired by Cardinal Federico Borromeo in the early years of the century. Bernini was also commissioned to build the papal tomb, though work on that great, macabre memorial, so different in spirit to the triumphal monument to Urban
VIII, only began after the Pope’s death. Outside the church he reverted to his more extrovert manner and built the huge colonnade which stretches out to embrace the square. In the Vatican palace he designed the Scala Regia and almost completed the statue of Constantine the Great. Elsewhere he and his pupils were responsible for new palaces, churches, fountains, streets and squares. It seemed as if the golden age had returned, and Alexander certainly earned his punning nickname as a ‘Papa di grande edificazione’.3 In the Quirinal, meanwhile, the Barberini favourite Pietro da Cortona was in charge of a large decorative scheme which employed all the leading Roman artists in painting scenes from the Old Testament in the great gallery.4 Pietro also worked on the reconstruction of S. Maria della Pace and, despite his increasing age and gout, painteda number of altarpieces for other churches patronised by Alexander VII, as did niahy other artists.' ' ' .................. . .
This astonishing flowering of the Roman Baroque proves how difficult it is to make any real estimate of the economic crisis that afflicted the city during the second half of the seventeenth century. It is evident that despite the tremendous drains on the

[Page 152]
Pope’s finances, his accumulated resources were still plentiful. Yet the decline continued without interruption and the contrast between his spectacular building policy and the general state of the city was starkly apparent. To the Venetian ambassadors the Pope complained of his poverty,1 and they in turn watched the ruinous expenses of Bernini’s portico and cautiously drew some obvious conclusions. ‘The Pope has long paid particular attention to beautifying the city and repairing the roads,’ wrote Niccolò Sagredo in 1661,2 ‘and truly in this labour he has far surpassed his predecessors.. . . The building
' of the colonnades which encircle the piazza di S. Pietro will be an achievement to recall the greatness of ancient Rome. It is estimated that the work is about half way through and that in three years it will be complete. I am not going to discuss whether such efforts are advisable at the present moment and will leave that to those who understand these things better than I do. It is true that Rome is getting more and more buildings and fewer and fewer inhabitants. This decrease is very striking and obvious to everyone, and in the Corso and the busiest streets one sees nothing but empty houses and the sign
To Let.’ Seven years later Sagredo’s heir, Giacomo Querini, had no such hesitations.
‘One very striking reason for the waste of so much treasure’, he wrote after describing the state of papal finances under Alexander VII,3 ‘has been the putting up of buildings which have destroyed rather than added to this city, the capital of the world. The erection of the porticos at St Peter’s is without any conceivable advantage. There are obvious weaknesses in the architecture for which Bernini has been blamed. The three hundred columns, arranged according to an oval plan, merely serve as an architectural precinct for the marvellous church of the Prince of the Apostles. But they will make the
Leonine city permanently uninhabitable, cause the Vatican to be abandoned and perhaps make it impossible to hold the conclave there. For the razing of houses, the increase in water for fountains and the extinction of fires will lead to malaria. All this confirms the worst rumours that over a million scudi have been spent on a series of catastrophic mistakes.’
Querini was exaggerating for political reasons. But, in fact, much of the desolation he referred to was real enough, though its origins were very different. In 1656 the last great plague to afflict Europe began moving north from Naples and struck Rome a few months later at the very beginning of Alexander VII’s reign. Though we are specifically told that work on the decoration of the Quirinal continued throughout this terrible year,4 the long-term effects on the economy were serious. As usual it was the independent artists who suffered most from the impoverishment of Rome. ‘For seven months now people have been talking only òf reforms and retrenchment’,’ wrote ' '
Salvator Rosa in 1662, and two years later the situation was no better: ‘As for commissions, I haven’t had any, even from a dog, for a full year, and if the war news gets any worse, I might as well plant my brushes in the garden... . ,’6

[Page 153]
The war to which Rosa alluded was averted by the total surrender of the Pope to
Louis XIV who was threatening it. And, in fact, the political situation of Rome was as important as the financial decline in affecting patronage. The career of Alexander VII demonstrated the collapse. As legate in Germany he had vainly protested against the peace settlement of 1648 which put an end to the Thirty Years War without taking papal interests into account. As Pope he soon began to suffer from Louis XIV’s aggressive nationalism. This reached a climax in 1662 when his ambassador, the Duc de
Créqui, seized on one of the characteristic street brawls of the time as a pretext for inflicting the most bitter humiliation that any pope had suffered since the Sack of Rome in 1527. Alexander’s nephews and representatives were publicly insulted and compelled to apologise for an incident that they had not provoked; Avignon was threatened with
French occupation; the Pope was forced to dismiss his guard.
The effects of this crushing defeat soon made themselves felt in other spheres.
Within a month of the Treaty of Pisa, which settled the immediate crisis, Bernini and a number of other architects were approached and asked to provide designs for the rebuilding of the Louvre. A year later Bernini was invited to Paris to supervise his proposals. The correct forms were upheld. The letters from Colbert and from the King himself were exceedingly flattering. Permission was sought from the Pope with great delicacy. But beneath the exchange of courtesies more powerful forces were at work.
Bernini was actively engaged on the colonnade of St Peter’s at the time. His presence in
Rome was very desirable as the Pope acknowledged. Yet ‘in view of the arrangements then being made with that Crown’, Alexander VII gave him three months leave of absence, and Oliva, the General of the Jesuits, who was most anxious to appease the
French, put the greatest moral pressure on him to go. After he had been away some six months, the feeling in Rome was tense and nervous. ‘Many people, and not least the Pope and his principal-courtiers, were . . . daily expecting to hear that Bernini had decided to stay in Paris.’ To such a state had the Pope’s authority now fallen.1
The unwelcome departure of Bernini for a few months was the most immediate artistic result of Alexander Vil’s defeat. Psychologically the effects were much more profound and, in the long run, much more disturbing. Humiliated abroad, the Pope’s prestige naturally suffered in Rome itself. Anti-clerical literature and pasquinades had had a long and vigorous history in the city. The extravagance of the Barberini and the
War of Castro, followed by the dominance at court of Donna Olimpia, provided obvious and much appreciated targets. Now, under Alexander VII, satirical contempt for the "Pope, and sometimes' even for the institution os 'thé pdpacy, reached new heights.2 The general dissatisfaction was focused in a picture painted by Salvator Rosa for Carlo de’ Rossi (Plate 24). This represented Fortune, who, seated at the top of the canvas with a great cornucopia, indifferently poured out her riches to a gathering of

[Page 154]
pigs, wolves, foxes, wild birds and beasts of prey. It has already been shown that Rosa had his own motives for bitterness which were not necessarily inspired by the political situation. None the less the allusions of this picture were too obvious to pass unnoticed, and jealous rivals were quick to point to its potentially subversive significance when
Rosa exhibited it at S. Giovanni Decollato. ‘The affair assumed such proportions’, wrote
Baldinucci,1 ‘that the painter was on the point of having to explain the meaning of his picture in prison’, had it not been for the intervention of Don Mario Chigi, the Pope’s brother and, incidentally, one of those most obviously implicated in Rosa’s satirical interpretation of Fortune. -
There is a double irony in Don Mario’s generous move, for at about this time his son, Cardinal Flavio Chigi, was commissioning from a second-rate Sienese painter,
Bernardino Mei, a ceiling fresco of Fortune under the control of Virtue.2 The issue was thus a live one, but general opinion certainly shared Rosa’s view that the overwhelming riches that accrued to the papal family were the results of Fortune only, with little or no sign of Virtue. In fact, the hostility aroused by the Pope’s brother Mario, and his two nephews, Flavio and Agostino, was all the greater because it had seemed for a time that he had decided not to summon them from his native Siena. As the traditional pattern developed, and the family grew ever richer and more overbearing, disappointment became intense. Neither of the Chigi nephews showed any great intelligence or culture, but Cardinal Flavio was fond of painting and he naturally employed Bernini to build, or rather rebuild, the palace in piazza SS. Apostoli which he bought from a branch of the Colonna family in 1662. The result of Flavio’s mediocrity of taste and Bernini’s genius led to a situation rare, if not unique, in Rome at the time: a spectacular façade with colossal pilasters running through the top two floors led into a building whose decoration and pictures must have appeared as an extraordinary anti-climax. There were the allegories by Mei—Fortune under the control of Virtue, Justice and Peace and
Youth rescued from the Pleasures of Venus—a theme of special relevance to Cardinal Flavio, who, in his country house at Ariccia some years later, was to hang a collection of portraits of the thirty-six most beautiful women in Rome3; there were other ceilings by Giovanni Angelo Canini whom the Cardinal had taken with him to draw scenes of interest on his humiliating visit to Paris; there were, above all, mythological paintings and portraits by Gaulli and, of course, antique statues in plenty. No doubt there were some fine pictures, but, compared to the collections of earlier papal nephews, the list
- is not a distinguished one.4
— iii —
Flavio’s limited interest was not the only reason for this lack of distinction. The very extent of his uncle’s patronage reduced his opportunities for employing first-rate

[Page 155]
artists—it is significant that Bernini did not begin to reconstruct the palace until
Alexander VII had been on the throne for nearly ten years. It is also true that the wide choice of talent that had been available to Paul V and Urban VIII was no longer in existence. But this, in turn, was at least partly due to a general decline in the numbers and standards of great patrons. The reasons for this decline are not very far to seek. The economic collapse, which has already been referred to, and a number of measures introduced by the Pope to prevent prelates deserting their provincial sees and living in
Rome, played a considerable part in the process.1 The old families were increasingly impoverished; new ones more and more reluctant to settle in Rome. Indeed, of the old-established clans only the Colonna continued, almost without interruption, to acquire important new pictures. Their palace, situated near the one sold to the Chigi, had been largely rebuilt and decorated by Filippo and his son, Cardinal Girolamo, during the first half of the century, despite the poverty which had compelled them to sell their principality of Palestrina to the Barberini.2 But the most interesting and influential patron of the family was Lorenzo Onofrio, Grand Constable of the Kingdom of Naples.
In 1661, at the age of 24, he married Maria Mancini, the niece of Cardinal Mazarin and the first love of Louis XIV. When she arrived in Rome she was struck, as so many visitors have subsequently been, by the splendour of her husband’s family palace after the comparative meanness of its exterior. For some years, while she bore him son after son, she was one of the two leading ladies in Roman society, rivalled only by Queen
Christina of Sweden. Lorenzo Onofrio, meanwhile, continued to make a series of impressive additions to the family picture collection which had so impressed Maria on her arrival. His taste was eclectic and at one time or another most of the principal Roman artists worked for him, from the bamboccianti to history painters.3 But his greatest passion seems to have been for mythological fables and landscapes, wherever possible in combination. Gianfrancesco Grimaldi and many other artists were engaged to paint landscapes in his palace, and he commissioned innumerable pictures by specialists in the subject such as Salvator Rosa and, above all, Gaspard Dughet (sometimes with figures by Carlo Maratta) and Claude.4 In this striking preference for landscape decoration
Lorenzo Onofrio helped to launch, or at least to confirm, a fashion which did not meet with general critical approval. Commenting on the constant demand for landscapes which reached its peak at the beginning of the new century, Padre Sebastiano Resta, a scholarly collector and pioneer in the study of Renaissance drawings, wrote rather acidly that he did ‘not derive much pleasure from these landscape artists and bamboc-
" cisti.. .’ and that even in his earher'days he had ‘hot much enjoyed such finicky modern works’.5 Colonna, however, was far too lively and expansive a patron to take any note
See, in this connection, especially Pascoli, I, pp. 35, 60, 72, 115, 125, 139, and also Bcllori, 1942, p. 128.

[Page 156]
of the complaints of scholars or pedants, and his employment of Claude, ranging over a period of nearly twenty years, showed the discrimination of his taste.1 After a Landscape with the Flight into Egypt which he bought from the artist in 1662, the year after his marriage, he subsequently commissioned from him a series of eight mythological scenes, including the so-called Enchanted Castle and Claude’s last picture, Ascanius shooting the
Stag of Sylvia, now in the Ashmolean Museum... The unusual nature of many of the subjects, and the fact that some of them almost certainly contain allusions to the Colonna family and estates, suggest that Lorenzo
Onofrio himself was closely connected with the creation of these beautiful pictures.
Certainly, his love of art was in no way diminished by the growing complications of his private life. Within a few years of his marriage he was compelled to agree to his wife’s demand for a ‘separatione di letto’, and his reckless infidelities led to her leaving him in
1672. A fantastic pursuit delighted the scandalmongers but served little other purpose, and after a brief visit to Spain, with which country his connections became ever closer, he virtually retired from public Use and died in 1689. Fourteen years earlier he had employed the two Lucchese artists Giovanni Coli and Filippo Gherardi on one of the most important decorative schemes of the second half of the seventeenth century: the frescoes, recording the exploits of his ancestor Marc’Antonio Colonna at the Battle of
Lepanto, on the ceiling of the great gallery in his palace. This battle scene with its plunging ships and toppling masts all rendered in bold Venetian colouring is in a category of its own as decoration and has little connection with Gaulli’s contemporary frescoes in the Gesu or Carlo Maratta’s in the Altieri palace. But the scheme is also significant from another point of view. The Colonna, though greatly impoverished, were among the few families still in the very forefront of Roman society who could genuinely claim an ancestry of heroic antiquity. As the ‘new’ families usurped more and more of their previous glories, contemplation of past prowess was one of the most obvious consolations, as the Venetian patricians were soon to discover in somewhat similar circumstances... . . .

**Footnotes:**
1 Besides Pastor, XIV, see Ciampi and Brigante Colonna.
1 For all these see Wittkower, 1958, and Portoghesi, 1955.
2 Besides die Fountain of the Four Rivers Bernini’s only important commissions from Innocent were the equestrian statue of Constantine and a series of portrait busts.
2 Barozzi e Berchet, II, pp. 71 and 98.
3 Passeri, p. 337.
4 ibid., p. 371, and Montalto, pp. 267-302.
6 Passeri, p. 337, and Golzio, 1933-4, p. 304. ,
6 A eulogistic account of Pamfili’s patronage is given in the poems edited by Girolamo Brusoni under the title Allori d'Eurota in 1662.
7 For a general outline of the situarion see Cipolla, 1952, pp. 178-87.
1 Barozzi e Berchet, II, p. 214.
2 Gigli, p. 233.
3 Missirini, p. 116.
4 De Dominici, IV, p. 19.
5 Pastor, XIV, p. 37.
6 Cugnoni, 1879-81.
1 Baldinucci, 1948, p. 107.
2 For general surveys of Alexander Vil’s patronage see P. Sforza Pallavicino, Libro V,cap. 5, Pastor, XIV, pp. 506 ff, and Ozzola, 1908, pp. 5-91-,
3 Ozzola, 1908, p. 6.
4 Wibiral, i960, pp. 123-65,
1 Barozzi e Berchet, II, p. 247: ‘e sempre si duole non della ristrettezza, ma della povertà sua . . .’.
2 ibid., II, p. 245.
3 ibid., p. 320.
4 Bellori, 1942, p. 82.
3 De Rinaldis, 1939, pp. 150 and 161-2.
1 Baldinucci, 1948, pp. in ff. In a note (107 on page 249) in this edition Satnek Ludovici says that one of the clauses of the Treaty of Pisa actually granted the French King the right to employ the Pope’s artists. This clause certainly does not occur in the published versions of the Treaty.
2 For examples see Spini and Limentani, 1961.
1 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, pp. 558-9. The picture is now the property of the Paul Getty Museum, Malibu.
2 Golzio, 1939, p. 14.
3 Pastor, XIV, p. 329.
4 Apart from Golzio, 1939, see also for Flavio’s collecting Incisa della Rocchetta, 1925, pp. 539-44.
1 Barozzi e Berchet, II, p. 245.
2 Prospero Colonna, 1925.
3 See the catalogue of the collection published anonymously in Rome in 1783 and the brief modern account by Corti.
4 Seventeenth-century artistic literature contains a large number of references to Colonna patronage.
1 Bottari, II, pp. 115-16.
1 For Lorenzo Onofrio and Claude I have closely followed Rothlisberger, 1961, p. 374, and other references indicated there.
2 For Antonio degli Effetti see the many references in Moroni; also Orbaan, 1914, p. 46; Vaes, 1925, p. 171; Bellori, Nota dei Musei and, above all, the manuscript account and inventory of his collection in the Biblioteca Casanatense, Rome, MS. 2372.