# 06 CHP-6 sec v

After the death of Pope Alexander VII official patronage of the arts declined precipitously. The deeply cultivated Giulio Rospigliosi, who became Pope Clement IXin 1667, reigned for only two years, barely enough to commission a magnificent portrait from
Carlo Maratta and figures of the Angels carrying the Symbols of the Passion from
Bernini to be placed on the Ponte S. Angelo. His successor, Clement X, was already aged 80 when he came to the throne, and the great and natural preoccupation of his family, the Altieri, was that he would die before they had time to complete the new family palace which they were building next to the church of the Gesù to the great indignation of the Jesuits.2 Work continued throughout the night with the help of torches and by 1673 the ceiling of the principal hall was ready for decoration. On the advice of Camillo Massimi, the artist chosen was Carlo Maratta and he in turn consulted
Bellori as regards the iconography. The fresco was thus the most considered work of the late seventeenth century in Rome, as representative of its period as Pietro da
Cortona’s Barberini ceiling had been of the rule of Urban VIII. Here too the climax of the fresco is a female figure, Clemency (a punning reference to the Pope’s name), bathed in golden light. But with that the similarity between the two works ends.
Everything has shrunk. The'fresco is now reduced to a thin oval rigidly enclosed within a carved stucco frame. The adulation survives—one of the figures standing with the three cardinal virtues is Public Happiness holding a standard to symbolise Don Gasparo
Altieri, the Pope’s adopted nephew and Gonfaloniere of the Church—but the means to express it have been so controlled that the painting loses all its propagandist fervour and is turned instead into a remote, impersonal and frigid allegory. The formal language is that of the Baroque, but the life has been drained away and only a still, flat echo remains.3
- It is also characteristic that the work dragged on for some twenty years and that the decoration planned for the palace by Carlo Maratta and his pupils was never completed owing to some unspecified differences with Don Gasparo Altieri.4
. The differences were no doubt economic. Pope Clement X was making a serious, and not wholly unsuccessful, attempt to reduce excessive nepotism, and Don Gasparo, though keenly fond of luxury, was unable to indulge his tastes on the scale osa Barberini
" See the avviso of 9 April 1672 published in Roma, XVIII, 1940, p. 57.

[Page 162]
or a Chigi so that the most memorable record of his patronage is Claude’s The landing of
Aeneas in Latium which he added to the same artist’s Sacrifice to Apollo, painted for his father some twelve years earlier? Clement X had good reason to try to economise.
‘The States of the Church are very impoverished’, wrote the Venetian ambassador.2
‘The treasurers report that when their officials proceed against debtors they do not get the gold and silver that they used to, but only worn and wretched rags. In the countryside around Rome cultivation is being increasingly abandoned because of the losses suffered by farmers owing to excessively low prices. This state of affairs is madeworseby the habit adopted by the Genoese three years ago of getting their grain from the Adriatic so that crops from the Roman shores remain unsold. In the Marches, Romagna and nearby provinces the ease of navigation encourages the supply of money, but the land is short of ready cash. In any case even there the disadvantages of luxury are making themselves felt.’ It was natural that the opposition to extravagant art patronage, which was always latent in certain sections of the community, should become vocal once again. A plan of Clement IX to remodel the tribune of S. Maria Maggiore, and thus provide a burial-place for himself even more imposing than those of Sixtus V and Paul V in the same church, was dropped after his death—to the great satisfaction both of his family, which feared that they would be called upon to assume the expense, and of the clergy which disliked the threat to the venerable mosaics.3 Meanwhile the municipal authorities were said to be drawing up a ‘resolution to give to His Holiness which was directed against the Cavalière Bernini, who was the instigator of the Popes’ indulging in useless expenses in such disastrous times’.4 Of Innocent XI, who succeeded Clement X and ruled for thirteen years, we are told that ‘his whole mind was given to driving back the Turks who had descended with all Asia on Vienna and Hungary’ and that for this reason Carlo Maratta, by now unquestionably the most famous artist of the day, did not have the opportunity to be introduced to him.5 This is not wholly true, as Maratta was certainly employed on one very characteristic task—the covering of an overexposed breast of the Virgin Mary painted in the Quirinal by Guido Reni at the beginning of the century.6 For this was a period of great austerity. The theatre and the carnival were discouraged and everything was done to suppress indecency in art—not with complete success, if we are to believe a French envoy, who found that Cardinal
Basadonna’s bedroom was full of ‘tableaux de nudités’.7 ‘La misère est déjà très grande à Rome, et le gouvernement odieux, et haï extrêmement’, wrote another witness in

[Page 163]
1685? In these circumstances it is hardly surprising that the Pope ‘did not have much taste for building’2 and did ‘not have the ambition to leave behind any permanent memorial of himself’.3 He refused to allow the chapter of St Peter’s to build a third colonnade and thus enclose altogether the square in front of the church; and when the
Jesuits, who had been given a large sum of money by the King of Spain with which they hoped at last to decorate the tribune of the Gesù, asked for permission to make use of the papal foundries, he replied that ‘if they had any money they should keep it and not spend it, for this was not the time to indulge in useless luxuries’. Most significantly of all, the chronicler who reported this added that ‘a hundred craftsmen could have lived for at least three years on the work’.4
And, indeed, if an artist of the stature of Carlo Maratta could see his official commissions almost vanish during two successive papacies, the situation of lesser men can easily be imagined. It was undoubtedly the threat of unemployment on this scale, as well as the increasing dogmatism of Roman critics, that discouraged so many painters from other Italian cities from coming to live and work in Rome towards the end of the century. This in turn naturally affected such patrons as still survived and wished to continue the great traditions of the Barberini and their entourage. For it must not, of course, be imagined that extensive building and decoration came to an end during the last phase of the century. If the darker side has here been singled out for special attention, that is because it was the side that struck contemporaries with special force; and it is impossible for us to survey the patronage of the whole century without noticing the great decline that set in during its second half and thereafter gathered weight. None the less even a drastic decline from the standards set by the Barberini could still leave rich, and sometimes magnificent, results, and there were certainly a number of important figures who greatly contributed to Roman art life at the turn of the new century. For reasons that have already been suggested the popes themselves were not usually the most prominent of these. The situation of Clement XI (1700-1721) is indicative. He commissioned many works from leading artists all over Italy, ‘and his feelings for painting were certainly not less than those of his predecessors, and he would have done very much more had he not been snatched away [from such plans] by the death of
Charles II [of Spain] and the rapid and fierce flames of war which swept through the whole of Europe’.5 It is symbolic of the conditions to be described in the following chapter that when Clement commissioned statues and paintings for the Lateran basilica, other potentates, including the Schönborn family of Pommersfelden in Franconia, had to pay for most of them.6 " '  '' ' ....................... "
Characteristic also of this state of affairs was the career of the most adventurous

[Page 164]
patron of the time, Pietro Ottoboni, nephew of Pope Alexander VIII who reigned for only two years.1 Pietro who was made cardinal in 1689 was then aged 22. He sprang from the Venetian nobility, but on different occasions both he and his father were temporarily struck off the Libra d'Oro by the jealous Republicfor accepting stipends from foreign governments. The offence was a natural one, for most of Pietro Ottoboni’s long life was passed in a desperate attempt to raise money from whatever source was available. He was a man with all the extravagant tastes of the traditional Cardinal-nephew who was able to enjoy the rôle for only two years. None the less he continued under successive regimes to hold the post of papal Vice-Chancellor and until his death in 1740 the palace of the Cancelleria in which he lived was the centre of the most enlightened and extravagant patronage in Rome.
It is, in fact, with some reluctance that one discusses Pietro Ottoboni in a chapter devoted to the decline of patronage. He was by. far the most cultivated papal-nephew since Francesco Barberini, and it is perfectly possible to see him as a figure just as influential—and perhaps even as constructive—in his effect on the arts.2 He was a versatile musician and a composer of operatic librettos; he fostered an important theatre whose scenery was managed by Filippo Juvarra3; at one time or another he acquired pictures by most of the leading Italian artists. None the less, Pietro Ottoboni was living during a period when the creative impulse in Rome was at a low ebb. He was able to revive for some half-century an echo of the Barberini glamour, but he left little behind him of permanent value. To his contemporaries he rightly seemed to be a figure of exceptional importance; to us he emerges as a man of the most amiable character and of consummate taste from an essentially second-rate epoch. Despite this he certainly deserves a full-length essay to himself; for a few pages, such as the following, coming at the end of a study devoted to patronage in Baroque Rome, cannot but judge him unfairly.
Ottoboni was a Venetian and the artist whom he patronised with the greatest enthusiasm was Francesco Trevisani who came to Rome from Venice in about 1682.4
For his chief protector Trevisani painted innumerable pictures of religious, historical and genre scenes as well as portraits.5 Many of these are of high distinction and some are painted with the sensitivity to colour one would expect from a man of his origins.
But the classical ambience of Rome and the influence of Carlo Maratta, whom Trevisani eventually succeeded as the leading Roman painter, were too powerful to be withstood, and it was as a gentle, sweet and academic artist that Trevisani won his European reputation. Such was-indeed the effect of Ottoboni’s circle on most of the painters who1 For a summary of Cardinal Ottoboni’s political career see Cicogna, I, pp. 269-70.

[Page 165]
worked for him. Sebastiano Conca, the pupil of Solimena in Naples, gradually lost the vigorous brio of his early years when he came to Rome in about 1706 and was taken up by the Cardinal and his friends.1 Gauhi, another favourite, also became flaccidly academic as the years went by. Only Juvarra, whose architectural style was certainly affected by the ten years during which he absorbed the academic Baroque of Carlo
Fontana between 1704 and 1714, produced new work of exceptional verve and vitality when working for Cardinal Ottoboni. But that was confined to his marvellous stage sets for the theatre in the Cancelleria.2 In so far as one can point to any-specific influence of Pietro Ottoboni on the arts it must be sought in a rather bland sweetness, restrained by the rules of academic classicism from verging too far in the direction of the rococo, and tending towards a certain cool anonymity. It was a style easily transmitted from master to pupil, from court to court, and easily appreciated by princes and general public alike. It lacked the vigour of the true Baroque, the intricate fantasy of
French rococo, with which it was contemporary, and the severity of later eighteenthcentury painting. With the coming of neo-classicism it was condemned out of hand and it still has not found many friends.
But Pietro Ottoboni’s significance in this story is not only that of a patron who affected those artists who came into close contact with him and his circle. It is also important to consider his failure to attract other painters who worked for him but who would not be lured to Rome. And these included the very men under whose genius and guidance a great revival of Italian painting was springing up at the turn of the century in almost programmatic opposition to the values fostered by Rome. The case of Sebastiano Ricci is symptomatic. He came to Rome at about the time that Ottoboni was attaining power, and, being a Venetian, he naturally did some work for him and his friends.3 But, says Mariette j’ai entendu dire . . . que, lorsqu’il fut venu à Rome et qu’il eut commencé à étudier d’après les fresques de Raphael, il souhaita de retourner promptement à Venise, disant que la manière de ce grand homme étoit capable de corrompre la sienne. Il sentait bien qu’il ne pourroit jamais atteindre à la pureté de son dessein, et il craignoit que son coloris faible ne gâtât le sien. Il n’avoit pas tout à fait tort.’4
More than thirty years later Ricci’s pupil, Gaspare Diziani, also came to Rome and was at once taken up by the patriotic Cardinal. But he produced nothing more for him than a magnificent stage set for the ceremony of the Forty Hours in Ottoboni’s titular church of S. Lorenzo in Damaso.5 Another artist, closely associated with Venice though he'lived in Bergamo, Fra Galgario, refused to come to Rome when called there by Ottoboni.6

[Page 166]
From Bologna Giuseppe Maria Crespi sent the Cardinal one of his most attractive and adventurous pictures—The Confession, in which a subject that had not been painted since Poussin was treated as the pretext for an affectionate yet slightly ironic scene from clerical life. Ottoboni, who was as easy going as Cassiano dal Pozzo had been austere, was delighted, and commissioned the remaining six Sacraments. These were equally successful, but Crespi remained as firmly in Bologna as did Solimena (who also sent pictures to the Cardinal) in Naples.1
Other patrons, besides Ottoboni, were finding it increasingly difficult, if not impossible, to attract their favourite artists to Rome.2 Financial uncertainty and the rigours of a classical taste, already outmoded elsewhere, were taking their toll. And, besides, two important rivals to the city of the Popes were now making themselves felt—the
European powers and the other towns of Italy.

**Footnotes:**
1 For the history and significance of these two Claudes, now at Anglesey Abbey, see Rothlisberger, s, p. 369.
2 Barozzi e Berchet, II, p. 360.
3 Pastor, XIV, p. 558.
4 See avviso of 2 August 1670 published in Roma, XVIII, 1940, p. 95. Bernini was under constant attack at this period—see further avvisi published ibid., pp. 58 and 95.
5 Bellori, 1942, p. 107.
6 ibid., p. 108.
7 See the report of the French envoy, l’abbé de Servient, to M. de Croissy in 1683—quoted Michaud, I, p. 176. Cardinal Basadonna’s tomb with a penetrating bust is in the church of S. Marco in the Palazzo Venezia.
1 ibid., I, p. 68. In estimating the reliability of these reports account must be taken of the extreme French hostility towards the Pope.
2 Pascoli, I, p. 311.
3 See avviso of 28 January 1679 published in Roma, XIX, 1941, p. 161.
4 See avviso of 18 February 1679 published ibid.
5 Pascoli, II, p. 546.
6 Hantsch und Scherff, pp. 92 and 93.
2 Every author of the period writes at length about Ottoboni’s passion for art; the fullest evidence for this is to be found in the manuscript inventory of his pictures in the Archivio di Stato, Rome—Atti del notaio de Caesaris, 1740, protocol!! 1838 and 1839.
3 For this theatre see Rava, 1942.
4 For Ottoboni’s relations with Trevisani see the unpublished life of this artist by Lione Pascoli in the Biblioteca Augusta di Perugia, MS. 1383.
5 For Trevisani’s portrait of Ottoboni, now in the Bowes Museum, see Waterhouse, 1953, p. 120.
1 Lores, 1934, p. 545.
2 Many of his sketches for these are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, DT.33.b3 Among these friends was the great violinist Arcangelo CoreUi. He owned a Europa by Ricci— see the inventory of his pictures published by Alberto Cametti, 1927, pp. 412-23.
4 Mariette, IV, p. 393.
6 See the unpublished Zibaldone by Tommaso Temanza—MS. 796 in Seminario Patriarcale, Venice. 6 Tassi, II, p. 60.
1 L. Crespi, p. 213. These pictures are now at Dresden.
2 For instance the Marchese Niccolo Maria Pallavicini who was, after Ottoboni, the most munificent art patron in Rome during the early years of the eighteenth century, found it impossible to keep Paolo Girolamo Piola as his private painter—Soprani, II, p. 186; Cardinal d’Adda, seconded by Cardinals Gozzadini and Albani, was unsuccessful in getting the Bolognese painter Domenico Maria Viani to come to Rome—Guidalotti Franchini, p. 19. Lazzarini, the Venetian, also refused to come, though strongly pressed—da Canal, p. 69.