# CHP-7



--- [Page 1] ---

Part II
DISPERSAL

--- [Page 3] ---

Chapter 7
THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE
- i -
IN 1669, five years after his bitter complaints about the impossibility of finding a
patron in Rome, Salvator Rosa was writing to his loyal and long suffering friend
G. B. Ricciardi that ‘every day I have to turn down commissions (and important ones
at that) from all over Europe’.1 And indeed the patronage that the popes found increas­
ingly difficult to maintain owing to the catastrophic financial and political decline of
Rome was being taken over by a wide variety of figures from outside Italy.2 Within
a relatively short time a recession, so critical that it might well have inhibited the whole
future of large-scale painting in Italy and turned the peninsula into a provincial back­
water, was halted by foreign intervention and then actually reversed. Italian painters
were soon in greater demand than ever before and they were quick to take advantage
of the situation. In Messina, Don Antonio Ruffo was severely snubbed when, in 1671,
he tried to get a picture from the Venetian Girolamo Forabosco.3 He would have to wait
two years and he would have to pay 80 doppie for two half-length figures. It was no
use, he was told, asking a painter of Forabosco’s standing for cheaper work, as he was
daily implored by the greatest princes in Europe to send them something. They were
ready to pay anything he asked for the smallest head and they considered it a real favour
to own anything by him at all. . . .
Blackmail of this kind was already commonplace. By the end of the century there
were few Italian artists who did not rely upon foreign clients for a significant proportion
of their commissions. Some lived in their native cities and painted for the princes and
viceroys of Germany and Spain. Others found it more profitable to leave and settle
in new countries. By playing off their Italian and many foreign patrons against each
other these artists could claim exorbitant terms.4 Soon after the turn of the century the
Bolognese painter G. M. Crespi wrote to the Prince of Liechtenstein who wanted him
to coinè to Vienna to help in the decoration of his palace that ‘I will be delighted to
accept the proposed honour provided that suitable arrangements can be made between
him who gives the orders and him whose duty it is to serve’.5 He then laid down his
conditions: he refused to work in collaboration with an architectural painter; his
1 Letter of 8 June 1669—De Rinaldis, 1939, p. 221.
- 2 Haskell, 1959.
3 Ruffo, p. 289.
4 See, for instance, the case of Albani as reported to Don Cesare Leopardi d’Osimo as early as 1647:
‘non la può servire sollecitamente perchè ha obbligo di alcune altre pitture da finire per varj Personaggi,
per Francia, Spagna, et Italia. . . .'—Gualandi, I, p. 38.
6 Miller, i960, p. 530.

--- [Page 4] ---

PATRONS AND PAINTERS
170
travelling expenses and those of his servant must be paid in full; both of them must be
lodged in the palace which was to be painted; he must be given two hundred Spanish
doppie for every space to be filled. And so the list proceeded. Crespi was exceptionally
successful, and not all artists could afford to adopt such an independent attitude. In fact,
in the artistic as in other fields, the law of supply and demand was relentless, but it
operated with painful clumsiness. Some foreign princes were disappointed after repeated
and strenuous attempts to attract a painter; some painters of equal merit were unable,
despite the most sycophantic perseverance, to arouse sufficient interest in the courts of
Europe. But in general the outlines are clear enough. Until the downfall of the Barberini
the opportunities for work in Rome were so great that few foreign rulers had much
chance of success when competing with the popes. With the decline of papal patronage,
however, the situation was reversed and many painters became aware of the fact that
there were greater opportunities for them abroad.
- n -
Ever since the High Renaissance the complete predominance of Italian art over that of
all other countries had been accepted without question by the rest of Europe. During
much of the sixteenth century rulers such as François I, Charles V and Philip II had
spent large sums in building up collections of paintings which they acquired either
through agents or directly from the artist. No one yet believed in the superiority of the
‘Old Master’, but after the deaths of Titian and Michelangelo there was a general
recognition that a great creative period had come to an end, and work by these artists
continued to be revered and avidly sought for in a way that had hitherto occurred only
with Raphael. None the less many modern painters were still greatly esteemed, and
artists from all over Europe were drawn to Italy as much by the reputations of her
existing masters as by the memory of those who had only recently died. And then, at
the beginning of the seventeenth century, new stars appeared on the horizon. ‘Some
painters have made marvellous progress and improved their art’, wrote the Flemish
artist Carel van Mander in Amsterdam1; ‘among them there is one called Carracci,
who is lodged by the illustrious Cardinal Farnese for whom he has painted many
excellent works, especially a beautiful gallery which is so exquisitely painted in fresco
that people say that it surpasses the manner of all other artists and that its beauty cannot
_ be expressed. Another man working in Rome is someone called Michelangelo da
Caravaggio, who does wonderful things. ...” Such was the heady news that reached
the North and turned the concentration of patrons once more to Rome and to Italy.
Throughout the first three or four decades of-the seventeenth century we find
frequent references in artistic literature to the odd commission from abroad, but these
were busy times in Rome itself and few foreign princes could make much of an impact.
Only one power was so firmly established in the peninsula that her rulers could compete
on almost equal terms with the popes for the services of the leading Italian artists. Lords
of Milan and Naples, enjoying the closest economic collaboration with Genoa and able
1 Vaes, 1931, p. 202.

--- [Page 5] ---

THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE 171
at times to apply decisive pressure on Rome, the Spaniards commissioned important
works from painters in all four cities. It was in Naples, above all, that they were active.
The viceroys maintained there a form of government which is still proverbial for its
combination of ceremonial and exploitation, and in these conditions the visual arts
flourished as never before. Moreover, Spanish love of the picaresque and a tendency to
mock that classical mythology which still meant so much to Italian humanists gave a
special imprint to painting in the city, exemplified in the cruel realism and grimy
‘philosophers’ of Ribera and his followers. The viceroys, almost without exception,
employed these artists to decorate churches, palaces and galleries, and on their return
to Spain they took back with them large and influential collections.
It was, however, a frequent practice to appoint as viceroy a man who had already
served for some years as ambassador in Rome,1 and this sometimes led to his developing
a taste at odds with that of the subjects whom he later ruled.'We find a striking example
of this in the career of the Count of Monterey, the most conspicuous Spanish patron
in Italy during the first half of the century. This small, vain, greedy man, whose features
showed ‘a certain ugly majesty’, owed his position to the influence of his brother-in-law,
the King’s favourite, Count-Duke Olivarez.2 In Rome, where he welcomed Velasquez
in 1630, he purchased ‘une infinité de beaus originaus de Raphaël et du Titien et autres
excellents peintres’,3 among which were two pictures of such outstanding importance
that they were perforce acquired for the King. Titian’s Bacchanal and Worship of Venus,
which had so intoxicated Roman artists when in the collection of Cardinal Aldobran­
dini, had passed into the possession of the Hispanophil Ludovisi family. It was from
them that Monterey managed to buy these masterpieces to the natural grief and
indignation of all Italians.4
Monterey had also made contact with a number of contemporary painters and
sculptors and when he was transferred to Naples in 1631 he wished to go on employing
them. This was not altogether easy. Neapolitan artists were ferociously jealous of
competition and were prepared to threaten violence in order to enforce their monopoly
of local commissions. When Domenichino came to the city in 1631 to paint frescoes in
the cathedral, he found himself compelled to seek the Viceroy’s protection. This
Monterey was prepared to give on his own terms: he insisted on the artist breaking his
contract with the ecclesiastical authorities and working for him instead.5 Lanfranco,
who had come to Naples to paint frescoes in the Jesuit church, was also employed by
Monterey, who commissioned from him pictures in his palace and altarpieces for the
Augustinian convent and church which he had founded in Salamanca.® When the
sculptor Giuliano Finelli, of Neapohtan parentage, came from Rome to work in the
1 Colapietra, p. 30.
_ 2 Capecelatro, p. 94.
3 Jean-Jacques Bouchard—Marcheix, p. 61.
4 J. Walker, p. 78.
5 Passed, pp. 61 and 64, note 3.
6 ibid., p. 157; Trapier, p. 109. A series o£ ancient Roman scenes painted for the King of Spain is
now in the Prado (Nos. 234-236), some of which are by Lanfranco.

--- [Page 6] ---

172 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
Cathedral he too was at once taken up by the Viceroy, who commissioned life-size
portraits of himself and his wife. He then used his influence with the Cathedral authori­
ties to get Finelli a far larger share in the decoration than had originally been planned,
though this met with the strongest opposition from the local sculptor Cosimo Fanzago.1
Monterey’s preference for the artists he had known in Rome did not, however,
cause him to neglect the Neapolitan school. In particular he employed his compatriot
Ribera on a number of altarpieces for his Augustinian church. But it is possible that the
new Baroque composition and much lighter tonality of these pictures represented a
concession by the artist to Monterey’s clearly demonstrated admiration for Roman
and Venetian painting. Certainly he, like other painters in the city, owed much to this
Viceroy’s patronage.2 And as the Neapolitans watched him depart in 1637 with his
forty shiploads of booty they must have had mixed feelings. Even by the standards to
which they were accustomed he was outstanding for the zeal and ingenuity with which
he had drained his provinces of men and money to help the Spanish cause during the
Thirty Years War. Yet his extravagance and greed had undoubtedly given the arts a
remarkable stimulus—and there might well be worse to come.
During all this time King Philip IV, whose appetite for painting was by no means
satiated by the employment of Rubens and Velasquez, remained deeply interested in the
Roman scene. In 1628 his ambassador commissioned one of Guido Reni’s largest, most
splendid and romantic compositions, The Abduction of Helen, to be followed three years
later by an even finer pendant of The Death of Dido from Guercino in Bologna; but
owing to some diplomatic confusion neither picture was sent to Madrid.3 Then, in
about 1636, an agent of the King negotiated an ambitious commission for a set of more
than a dozen large landscape paintings each of which was to include the figure of some
hermit or anchorite.4 These were designed to decorate the palace of Buen Retiro
which was being built at this very time on the site of a monastery of Jeronymites. The
choice of subjects given to the artists is therefore self-explanatory: equally clear is the
reason why Philip found it necessary to turn to Rome for the series. The type of
picture in which landscape and figures balance each other in composition and echo
each other in mood had been created in Venice in the early sixteenth century and then
largely neglected until its reappearance in Rome about a hundred years later. Though
the initial impulse for -this revival had come from the classically minded Annibale
Carracci and Domenichino, the convention had been greatly enriched by the more
picturesque and irrational contributions of Northern artists, who by the 1620s and 1630s
enjoyed almost a monopoly of the genre. It was practised mainly by the young Claude,
by a number of Flemish painters, of whom the most-distinguished was probably Jan
Both, and, to a lesser extent, by Nicolas Poussin. All of them were only just beginning to
makenames sorthemselves anditwas precisely to them that the King of Spainnow turned.
1 Passeri, p. 251.
2 Trapier, p. 72.
3 Costello, p. 247.
4 Röthlisberger, 1961,1, pp. 15 5-60; Blunt, 1959, pp. 3 89-90.

--- [Page 7] ---

THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE 173
It has been acutely pointed out by M. Marcel Rothlisberger that only a man who
was in close touch with the véry latest developments in Roman art and also fully
aware of Philip IV’s requirements could have been responsible for such an adventurous
commission; and the same author has indicated one man who had both these quali­
fications. Giovanni Battista Crescenzi, who was born in 1577, came of a noble Roman
_ family. His brother was a cardinal and the two men were not only enthusiastic patrons
and collectors but also among the very first to employ Claude, who painted frescoes
in their palace. Moreover, both were devoted to the Spanish cause. Giovanni Battista
went to Spain ‘ostensibly to serve as an architect, but some say that this is a pretext and
that what he really plans to build is his [the Cardinal’s] career as Pope’.1 The Venetian
ambassador was being too suspicious, for Crescenzi really did practise architecture and
he played an essential rôle in the building of the Buen Retiro. It is therefore more than
likely that either he himself, on a quick visit to Rome, of his brother, who was living
there, ordered the landscapes. This was, in any case, the most important foreign com­
mission placed in Italy during the first half of the seventeenth century. For Claude it was
decisive. In all he painted several other large landscapes, besides those with hermits,
for the King of Spain, and these firmly secured his reputation as the leading practitioner
in the genre. Poussin painted one or possibly two which were among his earliest
ventures into the field, and, in general, the whole school of landscape painting was given
a vital impulse which helped to establish its respectability.
Only one other nation was in a position to rival Spain in the claims that it could
make on Italian artists. Throughout the century French monarchs, statesmen and princes
kept at least one eye turned to the south, but the extent of their actual patronage varied
greatly with the confusing developments of international politics.
‘On dit queje suis chiche, mais je fais trois choses bien éloignées d’avarice, car je
fais la guerre, je fais l’amour et je bâtis’, boasted Henry IV.2 His assertion of the royal
supremacy through great works of architecture was of revolutionary and decisive
importance for the whole history of Paris; but, consciously or not, it was an essentially
patriotic’ programme, put into effect almost entirely by French architects and craftsmen
—the first large-scale enterprise of the kind to be executed without Italian help or even
specific Italian models in mind. Such a policy was justified by its triumphant success;
but in the field of painting it led only to the provincial decoration of latter-day Manner-
- ists such as Toussaint du Breuil and Ambroise Dubois. Henri’s wife, however, was not
a Medici for nothing, and it was largely under her guidance that a certain Italian influ­
ence began to make itself felt in Paris.
Historians are agreed that Marie de Medici was never very intelligent and always
excessively stubborn in defence of the two causes that were nearest her heart: pleasure
and power.3 Nor was her taste in any way remarkable. But she was closely related to
two of the most cultivated families in Italy—the Medici in Florence (she was the niece
1 Barozzi e Berchet, I, p. 242.
2 Crozet, p. 49.
3 Batiffol; Tapié, p. 67.

--- [Page 8] ---

174 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
of Grand Duke Ferdinand) and the Gonzaga in Mantua (her sister married Duke
Vincenzo)—and she was able to put these connections to good use." On her arrival in
Paris in 1601 she was horrified by the Louvre—‘more fit for a prison than for the home
of a great prince’—and she stayed for a time in the splendid palace of the Gondi, a
Florentine family which had settled in Paris some fifty years earlier. The garden especi­
ally was famous and the King was-so struck by a fountain of Orpheus enchanting the wild
beasts, made by the Flemish-Florentine sculptor Pietro Francavilla, that he summoned
him to Paris where he soon arrived with his assistant and future son-in-law Francesco
Bordoni.1 It was in 1604 that Marie undertook her first important service to the arts.
She persuaded her uncle the Grand Duke to commission an equestrian statue of Henri
IV from Francavilla’s master, Giambologna. This was to be placed on the newly built
Pont Neus. So impatient was she for the monument to arrive that she even asked
Ferdinand to dismantle the one that had been made for himself and to send her the
horse on which sat his own effigy. She explained that there would be plenty of oppor­
tunity for him to have it replaced at leisure. It need hardly be said that this request was
not granted, and the monument, which was completed by Pietro Tacca and Francavilla,
did not arrive for another ten years.2
From Florence Marie then turned her attention to Mantua and summoned to
Paris the painter who is most associated with the earlier part of her reign, the Flemish
Franz Pourbus the Younger. He arrived in 1609 and painted many portraits of her and
the court. On the whole, however, while Henri IV was still alive, Marie confined her
artistic interests largely to jewelry, silverware and other crafts. But after his assassination
in 1610 she grew more ambitious as her regency became ever more disastrous. In 1611
she ordered her architect Salomon de Brosse to build for her a huge palace on the site
of the one which she had bought from the due du Luxembourg. Once again she looked
to Florence for inspiration and she wrote to her aunt the Grand Duchess for the plans
of the Palazzo Pitti on which she hoped that the new building would be based.3 In fact
it was designed on wholly different lines and the work was in any case held up by the
internal problems in which she soon became involved. By 1620 she was back in power
and anxious to impress the world with the nature of her triumph. This she did through
a commission so spectacular in conception and achievement that it overshadows every­
thing else in her life. It was in 1621 that Rubens, himself probably chosen because ofhis
connections with the court of Mantua, was approached and asked to paint the two long
galleries in her new palace with allegorical scenes of her life and that of her husband.
The project is of such immeasurable importance that it must at least be referred to; yet,
in a chapter devoted to the work of Italian artists,„more attention must inevitably be
paid to another painter who entered her service not long afterwards, the Tuscan Orazio
Gentileschi.4 He arrived in 1623 after sending a picture in advance from Genoa, and
1 Baldinucci, IV, 1688, pp. 206-7; Desjardins, p. 49; Dhanens.
2 Desjardins, p. 50. The monument was destroyed in 1792. In 1559 Catherine de’ Medici had com­
missioned an equestrian statue of Henri ll from Michelangelo, but this was never executed. Tacca later
made a similar monument for Philip III of Spain.
3 Batiffol, p. 430. 4 Sterling, pp. 112-20.

--- [Page 9] ---

THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE 175
stayed for less than two years, discouraged no doubt by -the welcome given to Rubens.
During that time, however, he painted a number of pictures, the influence of which
has been traced on the styles of artists as different as Louis Le Nain, Laurent de la Hyre
and Philippe de Champaigne. Only one certain commission from Marie de Medici
survives, but it is entirely typical of her interests at this time. It is a large allegorical
painting of Public Felicity triumphant over Dangers (Plate 25)—a magnificent female
figure holding the attributes of French royalty who gazes, defiant and yet serene, at the
tempestuous storm clouds above her.
Marie de Medici was not the only ruler who was obsessively concerned with the
promotion of her personal prestige. In 1624, while Rubens and Gentileschi were
making use of all their gifts to this effect, her nephew Ferdinando, now Duke ofMantua,
was worried by similar problems. He was most anxious to be addressed as ‘Altesse’ by
the French court and he wrote to his ambassador in Paris for advice.1 In reply he was ”
told that pictures for the new palace would make a suitable gift. This answer must have
delighted him, for Ferdinando like his father Vincenzo was a fanatical collector and
patron who employed many of the leading artists in Italy, above all that most sensitive
and poetic of painters Domenico Fetti. He therefore proposed sending ten pictures of
Apollo and the Muses which Giovanni Baglione had brought with him from Rome a
few years earlier. Marie especially asked that the Muses should not be ‘tout á fait núes,
ni trop lascives’, but otherwise her reactions to the bribe are not known. On one man,
however, they did make a great, if only indirect, impact. They turned the attention of
her minister, Cardinal Richelieu, to Mantua whence he—and so many others—were
soon to obtain treasures of incalculably greater importance than anything that poor
Baglione could paint.
Yet Richelieu, though ‘le plus grand ministre de la France et le plus Alustre de ses
amateurs’, plays little part in this story.2 In Italy he made use of agents .of all kinds to
acquire such masterpieces as the pictures painted for Isabella d’Este’s studiolo by Perugino,
Mantegna, Costa and Correggio—but all these artists were long since dead. For most
of his career his dealings with the living were confined to Frenchmen and Flemings
such as Simon Vouet, Philippe de Champaigne and Rubens. Indeed, even when he
turned to Italy it was at first to commission the works of another Frenchman, Nicolas
Poussin, from whom in 1635 he ordered three Bacchanals for his chateau at Richelieu.
~And then during the last few years of his life he suddenly embarked on a new policy
of trying to bring to Paris all the leading artists south of the Alps.
The reasons for Richelieu’s volte face are not hard to fathom. He must by now
have heard with some envy of the triumphant success of the Barberini, who had turned
Rome into a permanent memorial to their glory, and he must have realised that for all
his ^encouragement there was no comparable talent avaflable in Paris. Above all, an
Italian protege of his, Giulio Mazzarini, was beginning to play an important role in
French politics. Throughout 1639 Richelieu was using all his pressure to have him made
1 Baudson, pp. 28-33, and II Seicento Europeo, 1956, p. 64.
2 Bonnaffe, p. 269.

--- [Page 10] ---

176 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
a cardinal and at the very end of that year he persuaded him to settle in France.1 Soon
Mazarin was appointed as delegate to represent French interests at the Congress of
Cologne and thereafter he acted exclusively for the French court. In view of his nationality, his love of art and the vital rôle he was later to play in the pokey of attracting
Italians to Paris, it is not unreasonable to give him the credit for having initiated it.
Early in 1639 Poussin wrote to his friend Jean Lemaire that he was worried by these
developments.2 He reaksed that the best Italian painters were still far too well treated in
Rome for them to want to accept French offers and he thought that only second-rate
men ‘autour desquels les François s’abusent très grossièrement’ would be likely to go.
In the event his prophecy proved accurate enough. Some months earker pressure had
been put on him and the sculptor Duquesnoy to come to France, but both men had
jibbed, and Poussin had laid down the most demanding conditions. To his surprise,
and no doubt to his regret, these were accepted, and in May 1640 the Surintendant des
Bâtiments sent his agent, Paul-Fréart de Chantelou, to Rome to bring back Poussin
and with him the ‘plus excellents peintres, sculpteurs, architectes et autres fameux
artisans’. All of them, it was hoped, would respond to the appeals made by Mazarin
and his friends in the upper reaches of Roman society.3 One of the artists they wished
to attract was Pietro da Cortona4; another was Guercino.5 But it soon became clear
that they had aimed too high. By October, after a series of refusals from everyone
concerned, Chantelou had to be content with escorting Poussin and a few quite
secondary painters. Even this limited success had been achieved only by using the most
extreme pressure ranging from ugly threats to bribery. Two other positive results
emerged from Richelieu’s Italian pokey. The briUiant etcher and draughtsman Stefano
deka Bella, who came to Paris in the service of the Florentine ambassador, found the
chmate sufficiently encouraging to settle and work there for ten years.6 And, after much
begging, the Barberini finally allowed Bernini (and his pupils) to make a bust of the
Cardinal, the most tremendous and dangerous of their so-called akies. This was almost
certainly derived from a triple portrait by Phikppe de Champaigne and it arrived in
Paris in August 1641—cold, aloof and elegant—little more than a year before the death
of its subject.7
Richelieu’s death in no way interfered with French plans, as the Surintendant
hastened to inform ‘toute la troupe des vertueux’ which now included Pietro da
Cortona, Alessandro Algardi, François Duquesnoy and Poussin, who after an unfruitful
two years in Paris had just got back to Rome on the pretext of fetching his wife.8 At
long last Duquesnoy agreed to go to Paris—only to die as he was about to set sail from
Livorno.9 This disaster merely spurred Mazarin, who had now replaced Richekeu, to
more ambitious heights. Early in 1644 he made a determined effort to get Bernini himself
to settle in France by offering him a huge salary. He was reckoning without Urban VIII,
1 Mazarin, 1961. 2 Correspondance, p. 15.
3 ibid., p. 31, note 2. 4 ibid., pp. 36 and 37; Brigand, 1962, p. 142.
5 Malvasia, II, p. 264. 6 Blunt, 1954, p. 89.
7 Wittkower, 1955, p. 202. 8 Poussin: Correspondance, p. 188.
9 Passeri, p. 11$.

--- [Page 11] ---

THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE 177
who, although nearly on his deathbed, still retained his authority over the great artist.
‘You are made for Rome and Rome is made for you’, he is reported to have told him—
words powerful enough to detain Bernini even when this munificent patron died and
bad days followed.1
And so the utmost exertions by the most vigorous of European nations had almost
wholly failed to compete with the attractions of the Barberini regime. English efforts to
dislodge the principal Italian artists met with very similar results.
The passionate love of art felt by Lord Arundel, Charles I and a few of his courtiers
is too well known to need stressing.2 Equally familiar is the story of the King’s purchase
of the Duke of Mantua’s collection of pictures and the great repercussions that this had
on other European rulers.3 By 1638 Gabriel Naudé could already write, in terms that
were to become so familiar in the eighteenth century, that some pictures in which he
was interested would probably go to Lord Arundel, ‘who leaves no stone unturned in
his efforts to strip Italy osali her precious treasures’.4 Yet we hear very much less of the
repeated failures of Charles I and his agents to patronise Italian artists and encourage
them to come to England—failures that have been largely forgotten in our fully justified
satisfaction over his employment of Rubens and Van Dyck. There is reason to believe
that the King himself saw matters in rather a different light.
Charles I and his ministers were making a conscious effort to break down the
isolation between England and Rome that had lasted ever since the most ferocious
years of the Counter-Reformation.5 His own wife and many of his courtiers were
Catholic; conversions were not infrequent; the penal laws remained in force but were
applied with much less rigour. In Rome reciprocal gestures were made: Englishmen
could travel there without fear of the Inquisition—indeed they were warmly welcomed
by Cardinal Barberini—and diplomatic exchanges were encouraged. With this political
relaxation came a growing English respect for contemporary Italian culture. The new
Catholic humanism appealed to many who had been repelled by the intransigeance of
the previous half-century and, in any case, the rise of connoisseurship promoted a certain
discrimination between the aesthetic merits of a work of art and its representational
content. Such sophistication was, however, characteristic only of a small, privileged
élite, and, as puritan objection to the court increased, it became more and more difficult
to maintain. The whole precarious balance broke down in 1642, but the tensions had
been there from the start and must be taken into account in any estimate of Charles’s
artisricpolicy.
Almost as soon as he came to the throne in 1625 the new King made his first
attempt to bring a leading Italian painter to England. After seeing a picture of Semiramis
by Guercino he offered the Bolognese artist the most favourable terms if he would
_ 1 Baldinucci, 1948, p. 92.
2 Stone, p. 92, and also Betcherman, pp. 325-31.
3 Luzio, pp. 63-167.
4 Lumbroso, p. 369, and in 1645 Gabriele Balestrieri wrote to the Duke of Modena that ‘gli Inglesi...
non hanno guardato a spesa per haver pitture di qual si voglia sorte’—A. Venturi, p. 252.
5 Albion, passim.

--- [Page 12] ---

i78 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
settle at his court. But, we are told, Guercino ‘refused to accept, as he did not want to
have dealings with heretics and thus contaminate his angelic character; nor did he want
to undertake such a dreadful journey in a climate so different from that of Iris own
country’.1 It may have been immediately after this that Charles ‘invited Albano into
England in a letter written with his own hand’.2 Whether it was the climate or the
heretics that worried Albani is not known, but he too declined the offer. Nor was
Charles any more successful with the sculptor Pietro Tacca whom he wished to come
to London ‘to make two horses for him’; the Grand Duke of Tuscany refused to author­
ise the visit.3 However, after some perseverance, the King managed to get both his
painter and his sculptor, though neither was of the stature he had originally hoped for.
Orazio Gentileschi had already been working for some time in Paris when he was
induced to come to England, probably at the end of 1625/ He had there begun to shed
the strong Caravaggist influence of earlier years and had developed a lighter, less
idiosyncratic, more decorative style. In England, where he was enthusiastically wel­
comed by Charles and the Duke of Buckingham, this process was carried still further,
though his easel pictures retained a rather intimate, informal narrative approach to
Biblical subjects which need not have offended any but the most rabid Protestant. His
large-scale commissions were equally harmless politically—Stuart propaganda for the
Divine Right of Kings was entrusted to the far abler brush of Rubens—and less up to
date artistically. On a ceiling of the Queen’s house, built by Inigo Jones, he painted
canvases of the Muses and Virtues which looked back to Veronese and the Libreria in
Venice. They are now badly worn and were probably never very distinguished. Genti­
leschi was old, tired and homesick, and, as in Paris, he found himself surpassed by the
ubiquitous Rubens.5
Charles I was just as keen to employ an Italian sculptor and in about 1635 his efforts
were rewarded.' Francesco Fanelli, the ‘one-eyed Italian’, was a Florentine brought up
in the traditions of Giambologna, Pietro Tacca and Francavilla.® His work in England
was almost entirely confined to small-scale bronzes whose restricted subject-matter—
horses and portraits—seems like a parody of the perennial national taste but in fact
reflected the special interests of one of his principal patrons, the Duke of Newcastle.
The Duke was governor of Charles, Prince of Wales, and an enthusiastic rider. For him
and his circle Fanelli ransacked sacred and profane literature to dignify his portrayals
of the horse. He also made an attractive little bust of the young Prince and another
of the King, whose features he caught in a work of great distinction though the expres­
sion is somewhat strained and the eyes lifeless (Plate 27a).
1 Malvasia, II, p. 261, and Mahon, 1949, p. 222, who suggests that there was no link between the
Semiramis and Charles I’s invitation.
2 Walpole, 1762, II, p. 51. Though this cannot be accepted as reliable evidence there is no reason to
doubt its substantial truth.
3 Baldinucci, V, 1702, p. 361.
4 Crinò, p. 203; Hess, 1952, pp. 159-87.
6 Orazio’s daughter, the painter Artemisia Gentileschi, also came to England for a year or two in
about 1638.
8 Pope-Hennessy, 1953, pp. 157-62; Whinney and Millar, pp. 121-2.

--- [Page 13] ---

THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE 179
Fanelli’s reputation in England was such that Lord Arundel planned to employ
him on his tomb. But Charles’s imagination was clearly stirred by more exalted visions.
He used all his influence to obtain the authorisation of the Barberini for Bernini himself
to carve his portrait, and by playing on the Pope’s hopes and fears for English Catholics
he achieved his aim. In July 1637 the bust, which was based on a triple portrait by Van
Dyck, reached England. There it could be seen that Bernini, despite his reverence for
royal splendour, had captured from Charles’s favourite painter all the poetic and dandi­
fied melancholy that has so endeared the King to subsequent generations—-and that
was so appreciated-by the sitter himself. Charles was delighted and loaded Bernini with
rich presents while plans were put in hand for another bust to be made of the Queen.1
Meanwhile Iris courtiers were intoxicated by the possibilities that appeared to open
before them. Thomas Baker, who took Van Dyck’s portrait to Rome, just managed
to get the master to -record his own fantastical features before the Pope, unwilling to
devalue his original concession, clamped down on further English commissions.2 Lord
Arundel was less successful. T send by Francesco a Picture of my owne and my little
Tom bye me’, he wrote in November 1636 to William Petty in Rome,3 ‘and desire it
may be done at Florence in marble Basso rilievo, to try a yonge Sculptor there whoe is
said to be valente Huomo, Francesco hath his name. I could wish Cavaliere Bernino, or
Fra[ncesco Fi]a mengo [Duquesnoy], might doe another of the [sam]e.’ But he wished
in vain.
Many contemporary works of art reached England from Italy before 1642. We
hear for instance that the King commissioned a number of paintings from Angelo
Caroselli4; and Cardinal Barberini sent the Queen so many pictures that she put them
on view in her private chapel at Somerset House—a particularly tactless gesture as there
were already complaints that the King was being deceived by ‘gifts of paintings, antique
idols and such like trumperies brought from Rome’.5 The most famous of all these
gifts was Guido Reni’s large Bacchus and Ariadne, but the picture arrived when the civil
war was already on the verge of breaking out and it was soon in French hands.6 Bernini’s
bust of the Queen had to be cancelled, Fanelli hurried off to Paris, and at about the
same time Gentileschi died.
— iii —
The 1640s and 1650s mark a turning-point in the dissemination of Italian art abroad.
In 1644 Pope Urban VIII died and, soon after, his nephews fled from Rome, thus
removing from the scene by far the most important source of patronage in Italy. By
the same year an Italian amateur of sine taste and insatiable appetite was in total control
of French affairs. In 1648 peace at last returned to Germany and Central Europe, and
- 1 Wittkower, 1955, p. 201.
2 ibid., with bibliography.
3 Hervey, p. 391.
4 Passeri, p. 191.
5 Albion, p. 395.
6 Guido Reni, p. 109.

--- [Page 14] ---

i8o PATRONS AND PAINTERS
thereafter recovery from the devastation of the Thirty Years War led to a new demand
for Italian artjust when England under the Puritans seemed to be losing interest. Whereas
the period so far chronicled witnessed the powers struggling in vain to share in the
marvellous flowering of the Italian Baroque, the second half of the century saw a
comparative decline in talent accompanied now by Italian efforts to win a place in the
new European balance of power. But this was not immediately obvious.
Cardinal Mazarin, who took over the government of France immediately on the
death of Richelieu in 1642, had been born forty years earlier in a little village in the
Abruzzi. He was educated by the Jesuits in Rome and soon entered the service of the
Colonna for whom his father worked as intendant. He accompanied Girolamo Colonna
to Spain and then served as captain of a regiment raised by the family to reconquer the
Valtellina in North Italy. There his very great diplomatic ability attracted the attention of
Giovanni Francesco Sacchetti, brother of Giulio and Marcello, and he soon became a -
special protégé of that all-powerful family. His position was further strengthened by the
support of the Bentivoglio, who, as has been pointed out in an earlier chapter, were
always on the alert for new talent. With such powerful backing he could hardly fail,
and he was soon acting under Cardinal Antonio Barberini who was trying to put an
end to the war between France and Spain over the succession of Mantua. It was in
connection with this problem that Mazarin pulled off his most brilliant diplomatic coup
and almost single handed fulfilled the Pope’s highest hopes of him. He returned to
Rome in 1632.
He was handsome, cunning and ambitious and he moved in the very highest ranks
of the most brilliant social circles in Europe. He was befriended by the greatest families
of the day, and he chose as his mistress Leonora Baroni, the singer whose fabulous success
inaugurated the long and frenzied tradition of operatic ‘stardom’.1 The families with
whom he was especially associated—the Barberini, the Sacchetti and the Bentivoglio—
were all exceptional art patrons and it is certain that Mazarin now acquired that passion
for collecting which never left him. It is much less certain how and in what way he
expressed it. He was not yet rich, though the Bentivoglio apparently lent him money2
and he had been appointed to a canonry of S. Giovanni in Laterano which brought him
in a regular income. Most reports speak of him as mean where his own money was at
stake, though always ready to spend that of others on himself. In view of all this it is
significant that the artist from whom he first seems to have commissioned paintings was
Poussin3: the nationality was suitable for a patron just beginning to show his political
sympathies; the price was doubtless reasonable as Poussin was not yet celebrated; the
artist was easily accessible in the centre of the Barberini circle yet not engaged on official
commissions. Poussin may have painted for Mazarin two of his most beautiful pictures
—the Inspiration du Poète and Diana and Endymion.4 Like the poesie of Giorgione and the
1 Prunidres, 1913, p. 41.
2 Brienne, I, p. 315.
3 It is most unlikely that Mazarin could have commissioned anything serious before 1632, the date
that Mahon (i960, pp. 352-4) has suggested for his purchase of the two Poussins.
4 In the Louvre and Institute of Arts, Detroit—see Nicolas Poussin, pp. 46 and 65.

--- [Page 15] ---

THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE i8i
young Titian, to which they owe so much, both are bathed, in golden light and, although
the subject of the former has not yet been fully determined, both look back to the lyric
poets of antiquity and the world of fable and mythology which, as we know from other
sources, so strongly appealed to Mazarin. Thereafter he took no further interest in
Poussin’s career and when, many years later, his taste was analysed by the intelligent,
malicious and not wholly accurate courtier Loménie de Brienne he was reproached for
his neglect of the artist’s mature, severe and classical pictures.1 When due account has
been made for Brienne’s prejudices his description of Mazarin emerges as consistent and
generally convincing: a passionate enthusiast, unscrupulous in his ambition to acquire
pictures, yet fastidious, almost effeminate, in his love of objets d’art and finery. We can
visualise him, his beautifully expressive hands bathed in perfume, discussing the merits
of some new acquisition with other amateurs and artists and carefully selecting exactly
where to place it, for JSon Eminence n avoit point de plus grand plaisir qu’ à ranger son
garde-meuble et qu’à placer en symétrie, dans les armoires diverses, dont il est plein,
ses superbes buffets d’argent et de vermeil doré, ses vases de porphyre, de porcelaine
de la Chine, ses cristaux et ses aigues-marines, et mille autres raretés dont il faisoit ses
délices. . . .’2
As yet this rich life of the senses was only just opening up to him. Increasing duties
kept him away from Rome for years at a time as his association with France grew
closer and closer, and he finally settled in Paris early in 1640 and was made Cardinal
at the end of the following year. By the middle of 1643 both Richelieu and Louis XIII
were dead and he was able to satisfy his artistic tastes and ambitions on an unparalleled
scale. .
It has already been pointed out that Mazarin’s earliest attempts to attract Italian
artists to France, made while Urban VIII was still alive, met with no success. He not only
failed to get Bernini to enlarge the palace that he had forcibly acquired from the finan­
cier Jacques Tubeuf; he was at first not even able to bring to Paris some of the best
Italian musicians, including his former mistress Leonora Baroni. But he was determined
to make use of Italian artists of all kinds. It was the change of régime in Rome that made
this possible. Early in 1646 Francesco Barberini fled from the persecution of Innocent X
and arrived in Paris to put himself under the protection of his former protégé, Mazarin.
Back in Rome his favourite painter Giovan Francesco Romanelli began to suffer from
the-first cold winds of neglect and hostility. A suitable arrangement was easily reached
and by June Romanelli was already at work painting the newly built upper gallery of
Mazarin’s palace (Plate 26a).3 The artist proposed a series of Roman histories. But the
Cardinal ‘showed that he preferred the Metamorphoses of ©vid as being gayer and
comforming more to the taste of the country’.4 The choice was wholly characteristic,
as has been seen from the account of his probable relations with Poussin. It was also
1 In fact Brienne says (I, p. 302) that Mazarin did not own a single Poussin, but he almost certainly
meant one of the artist’s later works which were far better known in France than his early pictures.
2 Brienne, I, pp. 293-4.
3 Mazarin, p. xxxiii.
4 Letter from Romanelli to Francesco Barberini of 6 July 1646—Pollak, 1913, p. 52.

--- [Page 16] ---

i82 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
a wise one in view of the nature of Romanelli’s talents. He was clearly far more at home
in scenes of erotic or Arcadian feeling, such as Ariadne being woken by Love, Narcissus or
Romulus and Remus (Plate 26b) than in those, such as Jupiter sending down his Thunder­
bolts on the Gods, where a more martial spirit was required. Glorification of Mazarin was
out of the question in view of his nominal dependence on the boy King Louis XIV and
the Regent Anne of Austria, and in any case the long tunnel vault of the narrow gallery
was scarcely adapted to a great unified fresco as in the Palazzo Barberini. In the event,
Romanelli divided the area into a number of oval, circular, rectangular and square
compartments separated from each other by frames of gilt stucco. His figures are
somewhat pale, academic and lacking in energy, and paradoxically enough, these
frescoes played their part in conditioning French taste against the more exuberant and
vital creations of the true Italian Baroque. .
These early years of Mazarin’s rule were important ones for the diffusion of Italian
art. Operas, ballets, fashions of all sorts, as well as pictures, sculptures and works of
elaborate craftsmanship were constantly arriving in Paris. In 1645 Giacomo Torelli,
the most distinguished of all Italian stage designers, was sent there by the Duke of Parma
for whom he had been working, and the beauty of his decors, as well as the elaboration
of the new techniques which he introduced, attracted (as they had done in Italy) far
more attention than the operas for which they were designed.1 Then in 1648, soon after
the departure of Romanelli, the Bolognese painter Giovanni Francesco Grimaldi came
to complete the decoration of the Cardinal’s gallery, by painting landscapes in theniches
and embrasures of the windows.2 In Rome, and indeed all over Italy, potentates who
were anxious to secure his favour sent him pictures. His old friend the Marchese Benti­
voglio had started the process as early as 1639 by commissioning for him a Caritd
Romana by Guercino.3 Some years later Mazarin himself acquired three further paintings
direct from the artist—a St Peter, a genre picture of a girl with a basket of fruit, and a
Venus mourning over the Death ofAdonis* In 1647 we find him commissioning a landscape
with the Flight into Egypt from Claude.6 And so the process continued.
Mazarin’s ambitions to bring Italian artists to Paris had not been satisfied by the
arrival of Romanelli and Grimaldi. In 1648 he wrote personally to Algardi and tried,
through the most generous offers, to persuade him to reverse his refusal 0's some six
years earlier. So advantageous were the terms proposed that the sculptor was on the
point of departing when once again papal policy interfered. Algardi occupied the same
pre-eminent position in the Pamfili court as Bernini had held in that of the Barberini.
However mean Innocent X and his nephew might be, they could scarcely allow their
principal artist to leave Rome, and so ‘they made him so many offers, so many promises,
1 Prunieres, 1913, p. 68; Bjurstrom, 1961.
2 Felibien, III, p. 530.
3 Malvasia, II, p. 264.
4 ibid., II, p. 327.
8 Rothlisberger, 1961,1, p. 274, who points out that although Claude recorded the purchaser of this
picture (now in Dresden) as the otherwise unknown ‘M. Parasson’, it belonged to Mazarin by 1653 and
was most likely painted for him through an agent.

--- [Page 17] ---

THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE 183
plied him with so much flattery and aroused in him so many hopes that they made him
change his mind and cancel all his contracts [with the French]’.1
Mazarin’s assumption of power in France strengthened his position in Rome itself
despite the hostility of the Pope. Soon after 1644 he bought the great palace of his
one-time patrons, the Bentivoglio, and planned to use it for distinguished French visitors
to the city.2 Though he himself never returned to see once again the rooms where he
had been received as an obscure and ambitious young diplomat, the thought that he
owned the vast palace, whose casino contained the world-famous fresco of Aurora
painted by Guido Reni for Scipione Borghese, must have given him intense satisfaction.
Soon afterwards he commissioned, through Paolo Maccarani, an agent in Rome, the
architect Martino Longhi the Younger to add a façade to the church of SS. Vincenzo ed
Anastasio in the Piazza di Trevi.3 Mazarin himself could exert only little control over
the architecture, and as the work dragged on he became increasingly harassed by
economic difficulties. ‘We are always talking about building,’ he wrote to Maccarani
shortly before his death in 1661, ‘and yet it might be better to think of building for
ourselves a certain and everlasting room in Paradise.’ But such hesitations did not last
and already the triumphantly bold façade served to proclaim the splendour and arro­
gance of the Cardinal’s authority in the very centre of fashionable Rome.
In 1649 Mazarin’s patronage of Italian artists met with a disastrous, though tem­
porary, set-back. The first Fronde—that strange and shifting alliance of aristocratic and
bourgeois factions—turned against the Cardinal with great violence. The political
implications of the affair are far too complex to warrant investigation here, and it need
only.be said that one of the special targets of Mazarin’s enemies was his employment of
Italian artists in the field of music and painting—described in a coarse and cheap little
lampoon as ‘de ridicules personnages/Avec de lascives images’. Giacomo Torelli was
financially ruined and imprisoned for many months.4 Stefano della Bella rushed back
to Italy after a narrow escape from lynching.5 Giovanni Francesco Grimaldi had to hide
in a Jesuit seminary before he too managed to get back home.®
- The next four years saw a series of fantastic reversals of fortune in Mazarin’s
position. A return to power followed by exile; marches and counter-marches; sudden
changes of alliance; the sale of his library and threatened dispersal of all his collections
1 Passeri, p. 210.
2 Mazarin bought the palace from the Lante family which had acquired it from the Bentivoglio.
The exact-date of the transaction is not certain, but it must have been before 1647—d’Aumale, p. 8. See
also Callari, p. 298.
3 In 1646—see avviso published in Roma, 19 3 8, p. 477. See also Elpidio Benedetti, p. 5, Mazarin:
Epistolario inedito, p. 119 (letter of 3 June 1650 to Maccarani: ‘mi piace riesca di Sua soddisfatione, perchè
non può essere, se non bella . ..’), and Mazarin: Lettres pendant son ministère, IX, p. 693 fletter osò March
1661 to Maccarani). The inscription on the façade reads: anno giubilei mdcl iulius s.r.e.d. card,
mazarinus a FUNDAMEN. EREXIT. Besides being Mazarin’s agent, Maccarani was a collector in his own
right. In 1675 he owned ‘une galerie de statues et de tableaux’—Span et Wheler, I, p. 236.
4 Prunières, 1913, p. 149.
5 Baldinucci, VI, 1728. p. 245.
8 Pascoli, I, p. 47.

--- [Page 18] ---

184 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
alternating with vital new purchases. For in the middle of these troubles, Charles I
in England was being faced with far more ruthless and successful opponents, and his
execution, followed by Parliament’s sale ofhis picture gallery, put on to the international
market the most remarkable treasures in European history. Somehow, in the intervals of
his difficulties, Mazarin managed to take an interest in these affairs across the Channel
and commissioned the rich German banker Everard Jabach to buy for him a number of
pictures from the collection of his former rival.1
By 1653 Mazarin was firmly back in power again and found that the vast majority
ofhis paintings had survived the threats to which they had been exposed. An inventory
was at once drawn up and from it we can gauge the extent ofhis collecting and patron­
age during the previous twenty years.2 He owned some 500 pictures which, apart
from Old Masters, had mostly been painted by artists with whomhehadbecomefamiliar
in his younger days in Italy. Guido Reni and Guercino were the best represented of
seventeenth-century painters, but he also owned works by Sacchi and Pietro da Cortona
among the Barberini favourites. To this taste he remained faithful all his life, paying
almost no attention to the developments in Italian painting that had taken place since
his departure or to pictures painted in cities other than Rome and Bologna. Nor did he
modify his position now that he had the chance to resume collecting. Among all the
works that he acquired between 1653 and his death in 1661 there is only one—a Landscape
with Apollo by Salvator Rosa—painted by an artist whom he had not known when
living in Italy.3 So many of the pictures in Mazarin’s gallery were given to him by
friends and clients that it is not always-easy to understand his own taste from an investi­
gation of their quality and subject-matfer, but when we have specific evidence of direct
commissions by him we see that he nearly always preferred to choose profane, even
erotic, themes. The accusations ofhis enemies about ‘lascives images’, though grotesque
when applied to a Titian or a Correggio, are not wholly incomprehensible.
Perhaps the best way of estimating Mazarin’s taste is to compare it with that ofhis
contemporary, Louis Phélipeaux de la Vrillière, a secretary of state.4 Brienne said that
he would prefer ‘quatre tableaux de la galerie de la Vrillière à tous ceux du Cardinal
Mazarin si l’on en excepte les trois Corrège et la Venus du Titien’. In bis palace, specially
built for him by François Mansart, La'Vrillière kept splendid paintings by most of the
artists represented in Mazarin’s apartments. But the accent was very different. Far from
finding that mythological subjects ‘conformed more to the taste of the country’, La
Vrillière chose from the artists he employed themes taken from the high, heroic world
of antiquity. Some time before 1635 he acquired a large and famous picture by Guido
Reni of The Rape of Helen which had been purchased by Marie de Medici a few years
1 de Còrnac, p. 144, and Taylor, p, 332.
2 d’Aumale, pp. 293 ff. -
3 See the inventory of 1661 in de Cosnac, item 1240. Incidentally, among those who drew up this
inventory was the Genoese painter and engraver Giovanni Andrea Podesta whose connection with
Mazarin has not hitherto been noticed—see Blunt in Revue des Arts, 1958.
4 Bonnaffé, pp. 168-70, and Briganti, 1962, p. 230. Guercino’s Cato is now at Marseilles—Hoog,
pp. 270 ff.

--- [Page 19] ---

ITALIAN ART AND FR A NCE [see Plates 25, 26 and 27 b) Plate 25
Gentileschi: Public Felicity triumphant over Dangers

--- [Page 20] ---

Plate 26 CARDINAL MAZARIN AND ITALIAN ART
a. Nanteuil: The Cardinal in his gallery
b. Romanelli: Romulus and Remus from ceiling of gallery in Palais Mazarin

--- [Page 21] ---

Plate 27
SROTPLUCS
NAILATI
DNA
YTLAYOR
NGIEROF
VIX
siuoL
:ininreB
.b
I
selrahC
:illenaF
ocsecnarF
..

--- [Page 22] ---

Plate 28 ITALIAN ART AND CENTRAL EUROPE
a. Cagnacci: Death of Cleopatra
b. Burnacini: The Elysian Fields from the opera La Monarchia Latina Trionfante, Vienna 167

--- [Page 23] ---

THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE 185
earlier. He followed this with a commission to Guercino for a Scene from the Life of Cato,
and in 1637 he ordered from Poussin Camillus handing the Schoolmaster of the Falerii to his
Pupils. The subject was chosen from Livy and told of the generosity of the Roman
republican hero Camillus who when besieging Falerium refused the offer of a school­
master to deliver his pupils as hostages and handed over the treacherous teacher to be
stripped and beaten by the schoolboys all the way back to town. It is one of Poussin’s
largest paintings, austere, harsh and brutal. In the 1640s La Vrilliere added to these a
series of paintings by Guercino [The War between the Romans and the Sabines and
Coriolanus and his Mother), Pietro da Cortona (Caesar restoring Cleopatra to her usurped
Throne, The Sibyl announcing the Birth of Christ to Augustus and the Finding of Romulus
and Remus) and Alessandro Turchi (The Death of Cleopatra'). The series was completed
some years later with Augustus closing the Temple of Janus by Carlo Maratta. Even a bare
list of the titles of these ten huge paintings is enough to indicate the differences in taste
between La Vrilliere and Mazarin. On the one hand we have the France of Corneille
and the elaborate ‘Spanish’ tragedies of the early seventeenth century; on the other the
world of Italian opera and ballet, of refinement and delicacy. Yet from one point of
view both men shared the same ideals. For while they continued to look to Italy for
their artists, a different group of patrons, made up mostly of bankers, lawyers and
merchants, was beginning to reject the attractions of contemporary Italian painting and
develop what was later to be considered a more specifically French taste for reticence
and classicism. Neither quality was especially attractive to La Vrilliere or Mazarin.
When Mazarin returned to Paris in 1653, the sale of Charles I’s pictures in London
was still proceeding. He was now far better placed to acquire some of the finest of them
than he had been three years earlier. Through his ambassador M. de Bordeaux he was
able to buy Correggio’s Jupiter and Antiope, Titian’s Venus of the Pardo, and a number
of Van Dycks, including The Children of Charles 1.1 Perhaps it was because even he was
satisfied by this fabulous haul that his collecting and patronage much decreased during
the last years of his life. Romanelli was called back to Paris in 1655 but worked exclu­
sively for the Queen Mother in the Louvre: this time he was encouraged to paint the
Roman histories which Mazarin had rejected nine years earlier.2 Gaspare Vigarani was
summoned from Mantua in 1659 to build a theatre in Mazarin’s palace, but found that
there was not enough space and moved to the Tuileries instead.3 Mazarin was still the
promoter of all these enterprises but, as if foreshadowing the coming rule of Louis XTV,
they were executed far more in the name of the monarch than under his own aegis.
Perhaps the hostility of the Fronde had had some effect. None the less his passion for
Italian precious brocades and stuffs of all kinds was as strong as ever, and these he
continued to acquire with febrile voracity.4 A month before his death he paid a last
visit to his pictures, and the account given by Brienne of this occasion, familiar though
it is, is too beautiful and too relevant not to be quoted once more5: ‘__je me promenois
1 de Cosnac, pp. 169 ff. 2 Hautecoeur, pp. 39-49.
3 ibid., pp. 84-9. 4 Alazard, pp. 18-28 and 55-86.
5 Brienne, IH, pp. 88-90.

--- [Page 24] ---

i86 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
à quelques jours de là dans les appartements neufs de son palais’ et j’étois dans la petite
galerie que étoit tapissée de Scipion tout de laine qui avoit été au maréchal de SaintAndré, la plus belle tapisserie du Cardinal, sur les desseins de Jules Romain, je l’entendis
venir au bruit que faisoient ses pantoufles qu’il trainoit comme un homme fort languis­
sant et qui sort d’une grande maladie. Je me cachai derrière la tapisserie et je l’entendis
dire “Il faut quitter tout cela!” Il s’arrêtoit à chaque pas, car il étoit fort foible, et se
tournoit tantôt d’un coté tantôt de l’autre, et jetant les yeux sur l’objet qui lui frappoit
la vue, il disoit du profond du coeur: “Il faut quitter tout cela!? et se tournant, il
achevoit: “Et encore cela! Que j’ai eu de peine à acquérir ces choses! Puis-je les aban­
donner sans regret? Je ne les verrai plus où je vais.” J’entendis ces paroles très distincte­
ment. Elles me touchèrent peut-être plus qu’il n’en étoit touché lui-meme. ... Je sis
un grand soupir que je ne pus retenir et il m’entendit. “Qui est là? dit-il. Qui est là?
—C’est moi, Monseigneur, qui attendois le moment de parler à Votre Eminence d’une
lettre de M. de Bordeaux, fort importante, que je viens de recevoir.—Approchez,
approchez”, me dit-il d’un ton fort dolent. Il étoit nu dans sa robe de camelot, fourré
de petit-gris et avoit son bonnet de nuit sur sa tête. Il me dit: “Donnez-moi la main;
je suis bien foible, je n’en puis plus.—Votre Eminence feroit bien de s’asseoir.” Et je
voulus lui porter une chaise. “Non, dit-il, non. Je suis bien aise de me promener es j’ai
affaire dans ma bibliothèque.” Je lui présentai le bras et il s’appuya dessus. Il ne voulut
point que je lui parlasse d’affaires. “Je ne suis plus, me dit-il, en état de les entendre.
Parlez-en au Roi et faites ce qu’il vous dira. J’ai bien d’autres choses maintenant dans la
tête.” Et revenant à sa pensée: “Voyez-vous, mon ami, ce beau tableau du Cortège,
et encore cette Vénus du Titien, et cet incomparable Déluge d’Antoine Carrache (car
je sais que vous aimez les tableaux et vous vous y connoissez très bien). Ah! mon pauvre
ami, il faut quitter tout cela! Adieu, chers tableaux que j’ai tant aimés et qui m’ont tant
coûté!” '
‘Il faut quitter tout cela’—yet even from the grave Mazarin was able to promote
■ the patronage of Italian art which had meant so much to him. In 1644 he had summoned
to Paris a branch of the Theatine order, which settled on the banks of the Seine. In his
will he left them a large sum with which to rebuild the church of St Anne-la-Royale
and directed that his heart be buried in it. For this purpose the Theatines summoned a
member of their own order, Guarino Guarini, who arrived in 1662. There he began
_ work on the church which was interrupted in 1669 and only completed some fifty years
later. With its curving façade, derived from Borromini’s S. Carlo aile Quattro Fontane,
and highly idiosyncratic vault, the plan made no concession whatsoever to current
French practice and remained as a wholly isolated-example of Italian Baroque archi­
tecture in the Paris of the Grand Siècle.1 As such it may well have served more as a
deterrent than as an inducement to further experiments of the same kind. For a reaction
was already under way, though it was not yet apparent.
Both Fouquet, the unfortunate finance minister who was arrested as soon as Louis
XIV took over power, and Colbert, who replaced him, had been employed by Mazarin,
1 Wittkower, 1958, p. 269.

--- [Page 25] ---

THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE 187
and both were enthusiastic collectors of Italian art.1 For all his patriotic ambitions the
young King found it absolutely natural to look to Italy for the painters, sculptors and
architects whom he wished to employ. In Florence Baldassare Franceschini was com­
missioned to paint Fame carrying the Name os the King to the Temple of Immortality.2 In
Rome Ciro Ferri was also working for Louis XIV3 and Pier Francesco Mola was
invited to come to Paris where he was offered an enormous stipend, but died as he was
about to set off.4 Like other painters he had seen which way the wind was now blowing,
and though the independent-minded Salvator Rosa refused an invitation to Paris in the
same year (1665), he was soon writing that ‘there is not a Frenchman fond of art who
comes here without trying to get hold of something by me’.5 But the culmination and
crisis of this French enthusiasm are to be found in Louis XIV’s plans for the Louvre.
Soon after the onset of his rule Louis and Colbert began to consider proposals for
building the eastern’front of the royal palace. Colbert was hostile to Le Vau, who had
been Mazarin’s principal architect, but after searching for alternative French designers
he was compelled to admit defeat and turn to Italy. As a first step he proposed submitting
Le Vau’s plans to some of the leading Roman architects, but he then went further and
asked the Italians to send drawings of their own. The resulting tragicomedy has been
examined in detail by many writers and only the outlines and significance of the story
need be discussed here.6
Arrogant nationalism had become very powerful as a result of the unscrupulously
patriotic policies of Richelieu and even, paradoxically, of Mazarin, but the French
hostility to Italian art which now began to make itself felt was based on more than
purely racial feeling. Criticisms of the plans submitted by Bernini, Pietro da Cortona,
Carlo Rainaldi and the unknown Candiani were precise and consistent: none of these
architects had paid any serious attention to French conditions; all of them were too
elaborate, too ‘Baroque1 for native taste. Pietro da Cortona’s drawing ‘avait plutôt
l’idée d’un temple que d’un palais . . .’. Candiani’s were ‘extravagant’; Rainaldirs ‘fort
bizarres et n’avaient aucun goût de la belle et simple architecture’. Modem opinion has
endorsed most of these views. It was Bernini who came nearest to imposing his taste
on Paris, and he did this mainly through the personal support of the King, but in the
end he too was unsuccessful. His first plans were rejected, but he was then invited to
submit further ones and to come to Paris himself to discuss the problem. After a trium­
phantprogress through the provinces he was introduced to Louis on 4 June 1665. His
first words set the right tone: ‘J’ai vu. Sire, les palais des empereurs et des papes et ceux
1 Alazard, passim, and Bonnaffé, pp. 68-9 and 113-15. —
2 Alazard, p. no.
3 RufFo, p. 298.
■ 4 Pascoli, I, p. 127. Canini, who accompanied Cardinal Chigi on his visit to Paris in 1664, was also
employed at the French court—Pascoli, II, p. 124. ■
5 Limentani, 1950, p. 21, and De Rinaldis, 1939, p. 193. Louis XIV’s attitude to Rosa was later to
change, for in 1697 a Battle by the artist which had been presented to him by the Papal Nunzio was sent
to Paris from Versailles with the following note: ‘tableau dont le roi ne veut point’—Bailly, p. 50.
6 For this section see, apart from Blunt, 1953, and Wittkower, 1938, Hautecœur and Chantelou.

--- [Page 26] ---

I88 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
des princes souverains, qui se sont trouvés sur la route de Rome à Paris, mais il faut faire
pour le Roi de France, un Roi d’aujourd’hui, de plus grandes et magnifiques choses
que tout cela.... Qu’on ne me parle de rien qui soit petit.’ But Colbert couldhardly see
the matter in the same light. He too was anxious for grandeur, but as a practical adminis­
trator he was just as concerned with expense and the detailed arrangement of rooms.
Bernini was nothelpful in this respect, and he failed to appreciate one essential difference
between the French monarchy and the papacy to which he was accustomed: despite the
age-old history of the institution itself, each new pope was determined to outshine his
predecessor and start afresh; a French king, on the other hand, was always succeeding a
father and a grandfather whom he revered and he felt no ambition to obliterate their
memories. Louis tried to explain to Bernini ‘qu’il avait quelque affection de conserver
ce qu’avaient fait ses prédécesseurs...’, but this made no impact on the Italian architect
whose proposals were uncompromisingly new. Thus the bitter hatred which he aroused
through his contempt for all things French could be crystallised into reasoned opposition.
There were factions at court; the King himself remained keen, but by October Bernini
was on his way back to Rome and it was widely—and correctly—believed that his
plans would not be executed.
During his stay in Paris Bernini had given one unchallengeable proof of his genius.
Within two or three weeks of his arrival he had been commissioned to make a marble
bust of the King and here at last he found a subject worthy of his exalted visions of
royalty (Plate 27b). Moreover this was his first opportunity to portray a secular prince
from the life and he was thus able to seize upon those individual traits of character
which he felt to be so important as well as build up an idealised, hieratic image of
personal monarchy at its most supreme.1 The bust he made in 1665 remains the most
compelling record of absolutism in the visual arts. Louis was sufficiently impressed to
order an equestrian statue. Bernini began work on this four years after his return to
Rome, but it did not reach Paris until 1684, some time after his death.2 By now French
self-satisfaction was at its peak. In military power, in literature and in every other sphere
no country—or combination of countries—could rival her. Two years earlier the
‘Gallican’ principles had signified the King’s desire to establish a State religion as
independent as possible from papal influences. No wonder that Bernini’s monument was
found uncongenial. He had been asked to base it on his statue of Constantine in the
Vatican—now these echoes of ultramontane claims must have seemed jarring and tact­
less. And on purely aesthetic grounds a native taste had developed which found Italian
floridity repugnant. Louis wanted to break up the statue. He then relented, but had it
banished to the remotest corner of the grounds at Versailles. Soon Girardon made the
necessary alterations and the figure was called Marcus Curtius.
Bernini’s failure in Paris is always said to mark the collapse of Italian artistic prestige
in France. It is true that criticisms and hostility towards Italian art became increasingly
powerful as the French grew more self-assured. It is also true that, with the full support
1 Wittkower, 1955, pp. 230-1, with bibliography.
2 ibid., pp. 234-6.

--- [Page 27] ---

THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE 189
os Bernini himself, Louis established in 1666 the French Academy in Rome with the
declared purpose of enabling French artists to share with the Italians the privilege of
studying the masterpieces of the past and thus eventually replacing them. And indeed
Italian participation in Versailles—the greatest architectural and decorative enterprise
of Louis XIV’s reign—was negligible. None the less the habit of seeking artists in Italy
died hard and certainly did not come to an immediate end. A Genoese landscape-painter
Francesco Borzone who had been summoned to Paris at the beginning of the new reign
was generously employed by the King until 1679.1 A Roman sculptor of classicising
tendencies, Domenico Guidi, was chosen by Louis ‘from all those not only in Italy but
in the whole of Europe’ to make one of the sculptured groups for the gardens at Ver­
sailles—but it was to be based on drawings provided by Le Brun.2 When, after many
difficulties, the monument, which represented Fame inscribing the glories of Louis XIV
on the shoulders of Time, finally reached France it was used to replace Bernini’s equestrian
statue. But even this Louis found ‘un peu riche de draperie’. Meanwhile Carlo Maratta
had been commissioned to paint a large picture of Apollo and Daphne for which he was
well paid and given the title ‘peintre du roi’.3 Some years later the director of the French
Academy in Rome was making enquiries as to whether the Bolognese artist Carlo
Cignani, who painted a couple of pictures for the King, might be prepared to go to Paris.
But the matter was not pressed as Cignani’s draughtsmanship was Considered too weak
—yet another instance of the divergencies between Italian painting and the more
rigorous French taste.4
It would be perfectly possible to choose many other examples of Louis’ patronage
of Italian artists, but here it must be pointed out how disappointingly little this was
compared to their expectations. Again and again we come across instances of Italian
painters looking—and often looking in vain—to Paris for support now that the Pope
was no longer able to employ them. The hints that they dropped were broad enough.
Bellori’s Le Vite de’ Pittori . . . Moderni of 1672 was dedicated to Colbert, Malvasia’s
Felsina Pittrice (lives of the Bolognese artists) of 1678 to Louis XIV. The Bolognese,
especially, were anxious to attract French attention. We are told that Carlo Cignani,
Benedetto Gennari, Luigi Quaini and Donato Creti were all keen admirers of Louis
XIV, and it is not being excessively cynical to suspect that such admiration was not
wholly disinterested.6 Further south the situation was more complicated. Thus Mattia
Preti made an allegorical portrait of Louis XIV which he intended to present to him
as a gift, but when hostilities broke out between France and Spain he realised that his
situation in Malta made such gestures imprudent and sold the picture elsewhere.6
Spain however retained a welcome interest in Italian painters and their works.
1 Soprani, I, p. 254. 2 Pascoli, I, p. 255, and Wittkower, 1938.
3 Montaiglon, I, p. 104, and Bellori, 1942, pp. 101 and 126.
4 Zanotti, I, p. 245, and Montaiglon, I, p. 190. In 1685 the director of the French Academy in Rome
tried to persuade Luca Giordano to paint a picture for the King, but the artist defaulted on his obligations—
Alazard, p. 142.
6 Zanotti, I, pp. 155, 170, 199, and II, p. 121.
6 De Dominici, IV, p. 50.

--- [Page 28] ---

190 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
Throughout the second half of the century Neapolitan artists were frequently employed
by the Viceroys, who were themselves often acting on behalf of the court or other
important collectors in Madrid. Against this general background certain specific
occasions stand out. In 1649 Velasquez embarked on his second visit to Italy.1 One of Iris
duties was to acquire paintings and sculpture for the royal palace of the Alcazar, and in
most of the towns he visited, but especially Venice, he looked at or bought pictures for
this purpose. A living painter was also needed, and here Velasquez was not so successful.
He had been told to try and persuade Pietro da Cortona to come to Madrid, but when
he reached Rome he found that the artist was too busily engaged by the Oratorians to
be able to move. So on his way back he stopped at Modena and made overtures to the
architectural painters Angelo Michele Colonna and Agostino Mitelli, but with them
too he had no luck and he was thus forced to return with several old masters in his
baggage but no artist capable of reviving the practice of fresco painting in Spain. His
employment of sculptors was more satisfactory: Giuliano Finelli, Alessandro Algardi
and other less distinguished men in Rome and Naples made copies after the antique
and original works for the royal collection. And in the long run even his attempts to
induce Colonna and Mitelli to come to Madrid bore fruit, for in 1658 both men finally
arrived and were assiduously employed.
Among all the viceroys of the second half of the seventeenth century one man
stands out far above the rest both for his political ability and for his distinction as an
art patron—a combination of qualities that was by no means frequent as this study will
have shown. Don Gasparo de Haro y Guzman, known in Italy as the Marchese del
Carpio, was appointed ambassador in Rome in 1677 at the age of 48? ^Hs youth had
been stormy and at one time he was even imprisoned for two years on suspicion of being
implicated in an attempt on the King’s life. Already he had shown a passionate love of
painting and by 1651 he owned one of the masterpieces of his country’s art: Velasquez’s
Toilet of Venus (the ‘Rokeby’ Venus).3 This was also one of the most ‘Italian’ pictures
ever painted by a Spaniard and Del Carpio must havewelcomed the opportunity to go to
Italy himself. Within three months of his arrival in Rome we find him visiting the
picture gallery of Salvator Rosa’s friend Carlo de Rossi and spending more than an
hour and a half there.4 Soon afterwards he was given a wonderful opportunity to add to
his collections when Cardinal Camillo Massimi died full of debts and his heirs were
- - compelled to dispose of his property. Del Carpio bought on a grand scale. He obtained
two portraits by Velasquez—of the Cardinal himself and of Donna Olimpia—and a
very large number of antiquities which he planned to have engraved.5 Indeed he clearly
1 Harris, in Archivo Español, i960, pp. 109-36, and 1961, pp. 101-105 (for Colonna and Mitelli).
2 For the fullest account of his politics! career see Ghelli.
3 Maclaren, p. 76. 4 Avviso of 12 June 1677 published in Roma, XIX, 1941, p. 308.
5 Harris, 1957, pp. 136-9. For his antiques see the album, belonging to the Society of Antiquaries,
of which the frontispiece is inscribed as follows: ‘DISEGNI d'Idoli, Statue, Filosofi, Busti, Urne piccole,
Bassi Rilievi, Medaglie, Inscrittioni, Vasi di Marmi, e Porfidi, Fontane di Marmi, Alabastri, e Metalli antichi,
e moderni; Quali Comprò in Roma l'Ecc. mo Signore Don Gasparo d’Haro e Guzman, Marchese del Carpio è
Helicce. I am most grateful to Enriqueta Harris for this and much further information about del Carpio’s
collection.

--- [Page 29] ---

THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE 191
felt an affinity between Massimi’s classical taste and his own, for he paid special attention
to assembling thirty volumes of drawings by old masters and contemporaries, parti­
cularly Carlo Maratta who was his favourite artist.1
Del Carpio was also a great admirer of Bernini, who died during his term of office
in Rome. He owned a small version of the Fountain of the Four Rivers in the Piazza
Navona and looked upon it as the finest piece in his collection2; on a visit to the sculp­
tor’s studio, he was able to acquire one of his self-portrait drawings from his son
Domenico3; and in Naples there were rumours that he was offering 30,000 scudi for the
ill-fated equestrian statue of Louis XIV.4 We can share his disappointment that this
offer was not accepted.
The Ambassador’s enthusiasm for contemporary Roman painting is recorded in
all the documents of the period. We are told that several times a week he would visit
the studios of Niccolo Berrettoni, a pupil of Maratta, Giuseppe Ghezzi, later to be
permanent secretary of the Accademia di S. Luca, and Giovanni Francesco Grimaldi,
the landscape artist5; that he launched the career of the young painter Paolo de Matteis
after finding him copying the altarpieces in St Peter’s6; and that when he went to Naples
at the end of 1682 ‘the painters lost a great lover and protector of their art’. They did
indeed, for there was no native Italian to show such discriminating enthusiasm.
In Naples Del Carpio continued his patronage and increased his collection of
paintings from 1100 to 1800/ putting in charge of them an obscure Sienese painter,
Giuseppe Pinacci, who proved to be an expert restorer.8 The palace, hung with master­
pieces and rich furnishings of all kinds, impressed even those who were familiar with
viceregal luxury.9 Luca Giordano, whom he had already met in Rome, replaced Carlo
Maratta as his chief painter and decorated churches and the palace for him. When the
Viceroy died in 1687, it was said that ‘Naples had lost a loving father and her artists
a great support’.10 Both parts of this judgement were true. For several years shiploads of
pictures- and antique statuary sailed out from Naples to enrich the collections of Del
Carpio’s descendants in Madrid.11 And the city which they left behind was no longer
what it had been only four years earlier. For Del Carpio’s contribution to Neapolitan
culture must be gauged not so much by the works he commissioned from local artists
1 Bellori, 1942, pp. 117 and 121.
2 See the introduction to the Society of Antiquaries’ album and Pacichelli, Parte IV, Vol. I, p. 39.
3 Domenico Bernino, p. 28.
4 Letter from Duc d’Estrées to Louis XIV, dated 27 July 1684, in Montaiglon, VI, p. 388.
’ 5 Pascoli, I, pp. 48 and 186, and II, p. 202.
6 De Dominici, IV, p. 315. „
7 See Discursos leídos ame la Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando en la recepción pública del
Exento Sr. Duque de Berwick y de Alba, Madrid 1924, p. 20.
8 Bottari, Et, p. 105, and Orlandi, p. 236.
’ 9 Pacichelli, Parte IV, Vol. I, p. 39.
10 De Dominici, IV, p. 164. For Del Carpio’s Neapolitan drawings see Saxl, p. 76.
11 See Listas de cuadros y objetos artísticos remitidos desde Italia a España por el puerto da Nápoles en los años
1683 a 1687—MS. El Escorial &-IV-25 (photocopy in Warburg Institute).

--- [Page 30] ---

192 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
as by the enlightened reforms with which he uprooted a hideously corrupt adminis­
tration. The misgovernment of rulers such as Monterey, followed by civil strife and
terrible natural disasters, had led to a situation unparalleled in civilised Europe. Brigan­
dage was openly encouraged by an irresponsible aristocracy. Justice was non-existent
despite an abundance of lawyers. The inequalities between rich and poor were too
glaring even for an age not unduly worried by social problems. Del Carpio’s brief
administration made the first serious attempt to tackle these evils. In so doing he aroused
bitter hostility from some sections of the nobility, but he also laid the foundations for a
‘new civilisation’ which was soon to lift Naples once again into the forefront of intel­
lectual Europe.
When still in Rome Del Carpio had tried to persuade various painters, notably
Giacinto Calandrucci and Niccolo Berrettoni, to take employment under the King in
Madrid.1 It-was not, however, until 1692 that a considerable Italian artist left to work in
Spain although quantities of Italian pictures were reaching the Alcazar. In that year
Luca Giordano embarked on the voyage that was to keep him in Spain for nearly ten
years. He was welcomed by the King with enthusiasm and a vast salary. In return he
introduced into the many palaces and churches which he so beautifully decorated a type
of painting in which the Spaniards themselves were deficient: colourful, exuberant,
facile perhaps but composed with marvellous ability, making use of devices learned from
all the Baroque masters, yet with a personal note of airiness and fantasy.2 From every
point of view the visit must be looked upon as thé most fruitful paid by any Italian
artist outside his native country- during the seventeenth century. Luca Giordano’s
brilliance rightly dazzled the Spaniards and led eventually to their employment of
such master decorators as Corrado Giaquinto and Tiepolo; and his influence, though
at the time it may have proved enfeebling for some already feeble local painters, was
much later absorbed with profit by the young Goya. For Giordano himself the years in
Madrid were equally important. For, unlike Bernini in Paris a generation earlier, he was
as ready to learn as he was to express himself. Already a keen admirer of Venetian art,
he found in the royal palaces a collection of Titians unequalled in the world for quantity
and quality and under their impact he dropped most of the remaining vestiges of his
darker Neapolitan manner. He copied Rubens and he pleased his hosts through his
sincere appreciation of Velasquez. When he returned to Italy he only had two years more
to hve, but even during that time he proved himself to be, at the age of 70, the most
‘advanced’ painter of his day.
- iv -
Despite the considerable impact of Spain, and even of France, on Italian artists, it was
in the Holy Roman Empire and then England that the true successors of the great
Italian patrons were to be increasingly found as the century drew to a close.
1 Pascoíi, I, p. 186, and II, p. 314.
2 Griseri, 1956, pp. 33-9, and Longhi, 1954, pp. 28-39. Zanotti (I, pp. 247-8) says that Luca Giordano’s
invitation followed a refusal by Marcantonio Franceschini to go to Spain.

--- [Page 31] ---

THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE 193
The Thirty Years War had devastated much of Central Europe, but though
Vienna, the capital of the Hapsburg Empire, had been threatened with military occu­
pation, it finally emerged in 1648 unscathed if greatly impoverished. The royal collec­
tions, however, had been housed in Prague, where they had been looted by Swedish ~
troops for the ultimate benefit of Gustavus Adolphus’s daughter Christina. Quite soon
the effects of this disaster were mitigated by the return from the Netherlands, where he
had been Governor, of the Archduke Leopold Wilhelm with the marvellous pictures he
had acquired there, some of which came from the gallery of Charles I. The Archduke
was especially fond of the Venetian painters of the early sixteenth century and one of the
contemporaries whom he most patronised was Pietro della Vecchia, part of whose
reputation depended on his forgeries of Giorgione.1 He also persuaded the most success­
ful Venetian painter of the day, Pietro Liberi, to come to Vienna in 1658 and stay there
for a year during which he painted a large number of pictures and was -made Count
Palatine in return.2 On his death in 1662 the Archduke left all his possessions to his
nephew, the Emperor Leopold I.
Leopold, who ruled from 1658 to 1705, was a keen but fitful patron who like his
predecessors found it natural to turn to Italy for artists. His father had summoned the
architect Lodovico Ottavio Burnacini, and Leopold commissioned from him a new
wing for the royal palace and a succession of the most magnificent stage sets ever seen
in Central Europe (Plate 28b). It was the theatre, in fact, which remained the centre of
Italian influences, for Vienna was still a fortified town under constant threat from the
Turks, and little large-scale building or decoration was yet possible.
Another dynasty that recovered with some speed from the effects of the Thirty
Years War was that of the Wittelsbachs in Munich. Their positionhadbeenstrengthened
by the Peace of Westphalia, and when, in 1652, the Elector Ferdinand Maria married
Adelaide Enrichetta of Savoy they found themselves allied to the most astute ruling
family in Europe.3 But Adelaide Enrichetta was also a keen lover of art and surrounded
herself with a number of painters and architects from Italy. She failed in her attempt to
attract Guarino Guarini, but in 1662 the Bolognese architect Agostino Barelli came to
Munich and built a church for the Theatines, based on the Roman prototype of S.
Andrea della Valle, and also the central block of the royal palace at Nymphenburg.
He was followed by an architect of far greater versatility, Enrico Zuccalli, who, under
the new Elector Max Emmanuel, was commissioned in 1712 to build a ‘Versailles’ at
Schleissheim. A number of Italian painters, of whom the best known are Pietro Liberi,
Antonio Triva and Pietro Bellotti, were also employed at Munich during the three
decades that followed the end of the Thirty Years War. -
Everywhere the pattern was much the same: autocratic rulers, intoxicated by the
idea of Versailles, deprived of native talent and desperately anxious to make up for the
1 von Holst, p. 132.
* Boschini, p. 44—The book is dedicated to the Archduke and discusses his collection of Venetian
old masters; Gualdo, 1818, p. 15.
3 Lavagnino, p. 69, and Heilbronner, pp. 887-904.

--- [Page 32] ---

PATRONS AND PAINTERS
194
glories of the Renaissance which had passed them by or been cut short by strife, all
turned southwards. By 1669 Johann Georg III of Saxony was employing an Italian
painter called Stefano Cadani at Dresden1; in 1674 an Italian architect Arrighini built
a theatre for Georg Wilhelm, the last Duke of Celle. Whole families of painters and
craftsmen such as the Carlone moved into Germany and wandered from court to court.
' As yet these men tended to be only mediocre artists, but from the 1680s onwards several
dozen German principalities were rich enough to attract the attention of the foremost
Italian painters. So extensive and influential did this German patronage then become
- that there is little room here for doing more than recording its scope and indicating
briefly its effect on Italy.
There can be no doubt that this was decisive for the very existence of painting.
Three cities—Rome, Bologna and Venice—were principally affected by this new source
of patronage, but all over the peninsula painters were devoting more and more of their
labours to German princes, and in some cases almost the whole of their output was sent
north of the Alps. The Liechtenstein family, which had been greatly enriched by the
expropriations that followed Protestant defeats in the Hapsburg dominions, ordered
forty-two paintings from the Bolognese Marcantonio Franceschini alone.2 At Pommers­
felden in Franconia the Schônborn family commissioned pictures from Antonio
Balestra and Gregorio Lazzarini in Venice; Carlo Maratta, Benedetto Luti and Francesco
Trevisani in Rome; Luca Giordano and Francesco Solimena in Naples; Carlo Cignani
in Bologna.3 It was—and often still is—in the palaces of patrons such as these, rather
- than anywhere in Italy itself, that representative collections of Italian late Baroque
" painting could be found. It is by comparison with Vienna, Pommersfclden and Vaduz
that a certain provincialism in Roman patronage becomes apparent, for no pope or
cardinal could'now hope to assemble pictures from such a wide variety of sources and
over such a long period of time.
As the money, gold chains and titles poured down upon them, these Italian painters
were faced with certain new problems. Their patrons were still mostly Catholics, and
large-scale altarpieces or devotional pictures were easy enough to provide. But lack of
direct contact with their German employers left them with some added responsibilities.
- ‘As for the subject,’ wrote tire Prince of Liechtenstein to Franceschini in a fairly typical
letter,4 ‘I leave that to your good taste: perhaps a Flora with a few putti would be a
good idea; or some figure representing Spring: in any case something that alludes to
gardens.’ Above all they were expected to send nudes.
. There is no doubt that a careful and full-length study of the subject would reveal
countless nuances of taste among the various German princes and show that some were
far more discriminating than others; but a superficial survey such as the present indicates
only an intense preoccupation with the erotic. ‘Tutte le pitture che intrano questa
1 Lavagnino, p. 66.
* Zanotti, I, pp. 227, 229 and 231, and Wilhelm, passim.
8 Hantsch und Schers and von Freeden, 1955.
4 Wilhelm, p. 136.

--- [Page 33] ---

THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE
195
galleria, son mondane’, wrote the Prince of Liechtenstein in 1691/ and he proceeded
to elaborate: ‘Carlo Cignani has painted a Bacchanal, a beautiful picture; Carlo Maratta
a Bathsheba; Baccinelli a Susanna; Piola a Vanità; Carlo Loth one of Lot and his Daughters;
Fumiani a Christ driving the Jews from the Temple; Peter Strudel a Tarquin and Lucretia
and a Joseph.’ A generation later Lothar Franz von Schonborn wrote to much the same
effect: ‘Une Souzanne et la Pudiphar seroit assez de mon gout; quant a la nudité je ne
m’en scandalise pas trop dans les peintures, pourvue quelles ne soit obscène, et qu’il n’y
ayet pas des actions ou gesticulations infâmes, et comme j’ay observé que le plus fort de
Strudel consiste in dem nakenden, allso muss man ihn davon nicht abhallten outre
qu’un beau corps et visage de femme orne bien un tableau.’2 Every other German
patron would have agreed with this sentiment and under their impact the female nude
played a more important rôle in Italian painting during the half-century after 1670 than
ever before or since. One artist especially, Guido Cagnacci, devoted much of his career
to satisfying the demand. After coming to Venice from his native Romagna he was
summoned to Vienna in 1657 and there poured out a stream of Cleopatras and Lucrezias
whose virginal and immature bodies undergoing outrages of various kinds added a note
of sophisticated perversion to what had long been a familiar repertoire (Plate 28a).
Many other painters were interested in the same market, though they tended to have a
less equivocal approach. ‘As he had a special gift for painting pretty naked women, he
attracted all the best amateurs,’ we hear of Gregorio Lazzarini, who sent much of his
output to Germany.3 So too did Carlo Cignani, of whom we are told that in his youth
he painted ‘subjects which were too alluring (tenere) and dangerous for lascivious men’.4
But this was a small price to pay for uninterrupted German order books.
Compared to the torrent of commissions that came from Germany and Austria,
the impact of England upon Italian art was almost negligible before 1700. But in the
next century it was to be so important that some outline of the earlier stages must be
given here.
After coming to the throne in 1660, Charles II made a few attempts to recover those
of his father’s pictures that were still available, but his motives were based more on fdial
piety than on any love of painting. He certainly showed no interest in contemporary
Italian art, and when, some fifteen years after his accession, the painter Antonio Verrio
entered his service he was employed with little discrimination.
. Verrio, like Gentilcschi before him, came to England from Paris, though he had
been born in Lecce and liked to call himself a Neapolitan. In common with the other
artists employed by Le Brun at Versailles, he had there been required to lose rather than
develop a personality, but in his case the process cannot have been a difficult one. He
was brought over by the Ambassador and introduced to the King by his first English
patron Lord Arlington in about 1675/ His earliest royal picture—A Sea triumph, being
1 ibid., pp. 89 and 92. ‘Mondane’ seems a curious way to describe some of these subjects, but it gives
us an indication of what the Prince was looking for even in. sacred pictures.
2 Letter of 10 October 1708—Hantsch und Schers, p. 164.
3 Da Canal, especially pp. 71-3.
4 Zanotti, I, p. 154. 5 Whinney and Millar, pp. 296-302.

--- [Page 34] ---

196 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
a large piece with King Charles II in it—was flattering if hardly very relevant to Charles’s
rule so far, and from then onwards he was much employed on a series of frescoes at
Windsor designed to illustrate the extreme theories of later Stuart absolutism. In their
possibilities of fulfilment these bore as much relation to the claims of Charles I as did
the art of Verrio to that of Rubens. Basing himself partly on what he had learned in
France, Verrio did, however, tardily introduce into England a type of Baroque decora­
tion that had not hitherto been seen there. Whole ceilings were covered with illusionistic
fresco and walls appeared to open up to the sky. The work was mediocre, but stylistically
it brought this country into line with European developments.
Another Italian artist who came to England at about the same time as Verrio was
Benedetto Gennari from Bologna.1 He was the nephew of Guercino whom Charles I
had tried to entice some fifty years earlier and he too was working in Paris, where he had
enjoyed a certain success. We are told that in England he earned a regular salary of ^500
a year and that he was given so many commissions from the King and Queen that he
couldscarcelyfulfd those from other patrons ‘not only for portraits but for other subjects
more suitable for a good painter’. Some of these brash mythological paintings, heavily
tinged with eroticism, have survived and we can see that in them he followed the current
French practice of portraying his sitters in the guise of some ancient heroine or
deity.
For a short time after 1685 James H’s attempts to restore CathoEcism to England
led to an unprecedented demand for the work of these Italian artists. Gennari turned
from Danae or Elizabeth Felton as Cleopatra to altar paintings, and in combination with
Verrio, Christopher Wren and Grinling Gibbons he helped to put into effect in
Whitehall the most full-blooded Baroque decoration ever seen in an English church.
But this could scarcely last, and in 1688 Gennari was compelled to leave ‘quel funesto
paese’ and return to France and eventually Italy, having acquired abroad ‘a new style__
which devoted special care to the rich decoration of his royal sitters’.
Verrio was more cunning. With his coach and horses, parmesan cheese, bologna
sausages, olives and caviar, he left the court and worked for a time in a number of
country houses. Before the end of the century, however, he had been taken up by the
new regime and was being employed at Hampton Court, where in à complex allegorical
fresco, whose subject was chosen from the writings of Julian the Apostate, he portrayed
the triumph of Wifliam III over the Catholic powers led by France (Plate 29)? Even in
an age used to changing allegiances his career was remarkable. Within little more than
a generation he had put his art at the service of Louis XIV and his greatest enemy
William III; he had painted the most Catholic and the most anti-Catholic programmes
ever seen in this country; and he had been required to figure the 1st Earl of Shaftesbury
in the guise of Faction and then take advice from the 3rd Earl, his grandson, in depicting
the Protestant virtues. He lived on until 1707, receiving a pension from Queen Anne,
1 Whinney and Millar, p. 182, and Zanotti, I, pp. 170-1. See also Raccolta di Memorie di Benedetto
Gennari—MS. B.344 in Archiginnasio, Bologna (photocopy in Warburg Institute).
a Wind, 1939-40, pp. 127-37.

--- [Page 35] ---

THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE 197
and was doubtless there to greet the Genoese artist Niccolò Cassana whom she employed
as her portrait painter until his death in 1714?
But in the long run the patronage of English royalty is of little consequence com­
pared to that of the tourists who flocked to Italy in increasing numbers during the
second half of thè seventeenth century. At first the majority of these were interested
only in their own likenesses (Plates 30a, 30b, 31a): thus Thomas Killigrew, the play­
wright, James Altham, an artist, and Sir Thomas Baines, a medical student, each had
his portrait painted by a leading artist in Rome, Naples and Florence.2 The few men
who were detained in Italy on business were more enterprising. Baines’s friend, John.
Finch, who was Resident in Florence between 1665 and 1670, commissioned a number
of religious pictures from Carlo Dolci and gave some of them to the royal family.3
And there are other collectors on this scale.
- Somewhat later two men especially stand out for their far more extensive patronage
of Italian artists. Sir Thomas Isham, a gentleman from Northamptonshire, left England
in October 1676 and spent nearly eighteen months in Italy, where he visited most of the
important towns with his tutor.4 Though he enjoyed a series of extravagant love affairs
and got heavily into debt, he also managed to acquire a certain number of contemporary
paintings, advised mainly by a dissolute priest called Buno Talbot. All his commissions
were given in Rome and, apart from copies of famous works by Raphael, Guido Reni,
Poussin, Pietro da Cortona and others, they included mythological pictures by Ludovico
Gimignani, Giacinto Brandi and Filippo Lauri, as well as his portrait by Carlo Maratta
(Plate 31b). -
The 5th Lord Exeter'was a collector and patron on a far larger scale.8 He was in
Italy on two occasions between 1680 and 1685 and he commissioned paintings in all
the cities he visited. In Florence he ordered nine from Carlo Dolci and fifteen from Luca
Giordano, who was engaged on his frescoes in the Palazzo Riccardi. These two artists,
whose contrasting qualities of gentle, sweet, primitive restraint and dashing virtuosity
were glaringly obvious, seem to have been his favourites, and this in itself tells us much
about the breadth—or inconsistency—of his taste. In fact Lord Exeter, coming from
an England still largely bereft of Italian painting, proved himself a glutton for every kind
of aesthetic experience. In Venice he bought Liberis; in Bologna, Lorenzo Pasinelli; in
Genoa, Piola, Assereto and Valerio Castelli; in Rome, Maratta, Brandi, Gaulli and
Calandrucci. No Englishman had ever commissioned contemporary Italian painting
on such a scale before; few were ever to do so again. He also persuaded the FrancoItalian sculptor Pierre Monnot to make a tomb for him6 and when back again at
1 Agnelli, printed at end ofbook after imprimatur. Ratti (Soprani/Ratti, II, p. 15) says that he died
in 1713 after refusing an official post as the Queen’s Painter. It is not known just when he came to England
or whether he died in this country.
■ 2 Killigrew by Canini in 1651—Vertue, I, p. 114; James Altham as a hermit by Salvator Rosa in 1665
(Bankes Collection)—Italian Art and Britain, p. 20; Sir Thomas Baines by Carlo Dolci between 1665 and
1670 (Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge)—ibid., p. 19. 3 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 503.
4 Burden, pp. 1-25. The pictures are all at Lamport Hall, Northants.
5 Waterhouse, i960, p. 57; Bellori, 1942, p. 98. The pictures are mostly still at Burghley.
6 Pascoli, II, p. 491; Honour, pp. 220 ff.

--- [Page 36] ---

198 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
Burghley, his country house, he took advantage of the circumstances that compelled
Verrio to leave the court and employed him to paint ceiling frescoes.1
Lord Exeter played a highly significant role in the history of English collecting.
We are told that he introduced Carlo Maratta to several members of the nobility, and
it is not long before the Italian biographies are full of vivid accounts of the English
milordi visiting studios, paying fabulous prices and inviting artists from all over the
peninsula to come and settle in England.2 It was just this indiscriminate enthusiasm that
led to the theorising of the 3rd Earl of Shaftesbury, by far the most cultivated English
aesthete of the day. More than anyone he welcomed and stimulated English patronage
of the arts and yet he felt that the whole subject needed far more consideration than it
had yet received.
His own contacts with Italian art had been intense but not always happy. He had
visited Italy in 1686 when still only 15, but though he ‘acquired great knowledge of the
polite arts’, nothing is known of the results.3 Then as an eager Whig intellectual, deeply
sympathetic to Holland and hostile to France, he had in all probability helped to draw
up the programme for Verrio’s frescoes at Hampton Court with their learned allusions
to the policies of William III.4 In 1699 he sent the portrait painter John Closterman to
Rome in order to find there a sculptor capable of making for him a series of Virtues—
a wholly characteristic choice of subject in a pupil of Locke and the Cambridge Platonists.5 Closterman sent him some drawings of Prudence and Justice by Domenico Guidi with
a highly discouraging letter which Shaftesbury must have endorsed, for nothing came
of the project. At the same time Closterman, who had already painted a full-length
portrait of his patron in classical dress with volumes of Plato and Xenophon at his side,
suggested that Shaftesbury himself should give the most detailed instructions to those
artists he proposed to employ in the suture.
This became possible when in 1711 he was forced to retire to Naples because of
ill-health. There he mixed in intellectual circles, bought pictures for his English friends
and decided to put his aesthetic ideas into practice.® He chose the painter Paolo de
Matteis for his experiment and gave him detailed instructions (which were later pub­
lished) for a picture of Hercules at the Crossroads between Vice and Virtue (Plate 32b). The
bewildered artist was made to realise all the visual and philosophical implications of
the theme, for ‘the merely natural must pay homage to the historical or moral . . .
_ nothing is more fatal, either to painting, architecture or the other arts, than this false
relish, which is governed rather by what immediately strikes the sense, than by what
consequentially and by reflection pleases the mind and satisfies the thought and reason’.
Shaftesbury’s elevated ideas and his conception of the artist as a mechanical executant
were not new, but they had rarely been so stringently applied to an actual creation.
1 Vertue, II, p. 132.
2 See, for instance, Pascoli, l, pp. 140,215,226; Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 503; de Dominici, IV, p. 292.
8 Brett, p. 38.
4 Wind, 1939-40, pp. 134-5.
8 Wind, 1938, pp. 185-8.
8 Croce, 1927, pp. 272-309; Shaftesbury, pp. 30-61; Wells, pp. 23-8; and de Dominici, IV, p. 329.

--- [Page 37] ---

THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE 199
Nor in fact did—or could—the resulting picture betray the complex thought that had
gone into its making. Though his ideas were always to be of greater interest to theorists
than to artists, he himself was well satisfied with the outcome, and in 1713 he com­
missioned one further and deeply moving picture from de Matteis: ‘Un homme de
qualité, grand d’un certain Royaume, Virtuoso, Pliilosophe, et Auteur connu par ses
Ouvrages, s’étant retire dans une certaine Ville salutaire pour se soulager de ses Fatigues,
poursuit encore ses Etudes, tout malade, épuisé, et presque mourant, comme il est.’
Despite—or because of—its biographical content, the picture was to be a ‘history’ and
once again Shaftesbury enclosed a rough drawing of his own to guide the artist, pre­
scribed details down to the exact inclination of the head and insisted on examining the
preliminary sketches. But this time he was too late and he died within a month of
giving the order.1
Fortunately Shaftesbury had more to offer the English than doctrines which were
bound to prove sterile in practice. He was one of the first to stress the role of art in
‘civilising’ society, though he extended this to the less acceptable concept that a good
society would necessarily give birth to good art. And his informal writings prove that
he was certainly not blind to the more emotional appeal of painting. Though the
English soon showed a strong national taste for portraiture, views and landscape at
the expense of the serious history pictures which he had recommended, the extent of
their collecting and patronage was in some measure due to his example and preaching.
- v -
The conditions of art patronage in Italy had totally altered during the second half of
the seventeenth century. Painters were compelled to look north rather than to Rome,
and the declining prestige of the popes had thus, by a strange paradox, led to that very
Italianising of Europe which had been one of their aims in happier days. Moreover, this
loss of power had, by limiting the concentration of artists in Rome, indirectly encour­
aged the growth of a number of active ‘provincial’ centres. Roman art, represented
above all by Carlo Maratta, continued to enjoy a great reputation, but it was no longer
unique, for the aspiring collector in England and Germany could, and often did, turn
instead to Bologna, Venice or Naples. Artists in these cities broke through the rather
stifling barriers of the tight little regimes under which they lived and sent their works
as far afield as London, Paris and Vienna, Munich, Stockholm and Madrid. Crespi and
Francéschini, Luca Giordano and Solimena, Lazzarini and Sebastiano Ricci were
European favourites just as much as were Maratta and Trevisani. The very end of the
seventeenth and early years of the next century saw this isolation broken down still
further, for a number of complex wars brought Italy back into the forefront of inter­
national politics and disrupted a status quo that had remained largely unaltered for
nearly 150 years.
In 1683 Vienna was saved from the Turks and in the following year Venice joined
a Holy League with the Holy Roman Empire and the King of Poland. Then came the
1 Sweetman, pp. no-16.

--- [Page 38] ---

200 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
war of the Spanish succession. Victor Amadeus of Savoy broke loose from the tutelage
of Louis XIV and after a series of tortuous' manoeuvres finally emerged as the leading
independent ruler in Italy. The Austrians conquered Lombardy and seized Naples
from the Spaniards. These changes, which were confirmed by the Treaties of Utrecht
and Rastatt in 1713 and 1714, had their counterparts in the patronage of Italian art.
Military commanders of all the warring nations took advantage of the fleeting
opportunities between campaigns to commission local talent and were served with fine
impartiality by artists in many cities. There was Admiral ‘Pekemburgh’, for instance,
who sailed into Genoa with a squadron of English ships sometime before 1703 and
ordered his bust from the sculptor Domenico Parodi whom he then tried in vain to
take back with him to England1; or the French Maréchal de Noailles who arrived soon
after and was more successful in persuading Gregorio de Ferrari to come to Marseilles
and paint some pictures for him there2; or the Duc d’Estrées who visited Naples with
Philip V, French candidate for the Spanish throne, and was so struck by Paolo de
Matteis that he took him back to Paris and introduced him to a number of influential
nobles and bankers.3 This was an important occasion for it stimulated interest in con­
temporary Italian painting among some of the younger generation of art lovers who
were growing tired of the ‘official’ style at Versailles.4 But hardly had Paolo got back
to Naples when the city was conquered by the opposing forces and he found himself
working for the English Admiral ‘Binchs’ and the Austrian commander Count Daun
who had been responsible for its capture.5 Daun, who in 1707 was made the first viceroy
of the new regime, rivalled his Spanish predecessors in the patronage of Italian art.®
Solimena, Giacomo del Po and Paolo de Matteis all produced canvases to decorate his
palace in Vienna which was frescoed by the Bolognese Marc’antonio Chiarini.
Although his first appointment in Naples only lasted for a few months, he came back
for a further six years in 1713 and was one of the principal agents through whom Nea­
politan painting was introduced into Central Europe—a process which was carried much
Anther after 1728 by the most cultivated of all the Austrian viceroys, Count Harrach.7
Besides these men there were a number of high commanders of Italian origin serving in
the Imperial army and they were especially keen to take the opportunity of furnishing
1 Soprani, H, p. 120. This may possibly be tbe famous 3rd Earl ofPeterborough who arrived in Italy
from Spain for a few months in 1707 and then returned for a much longer period in the next decade, when
he certainly commissioned a number of pictures from dal Sole.—Zanotti, I, p. 309.
2 Soprani, II, p. 115. .
3 The duc d’Estrées arrived in Naples in 1702—de Dominici, IV, p. 321. In Paris de Matteis worked
for Pierre Crozat among other patrons—see Loret, p. 543. -
4 Among these was certainly the duc d’Orléans, later tojbe Regent, who in 1715 invited Solimena
to Paris (Bologna, p. 191) and became an important patron of contemporary Italian art.
6 De Dominici, IV, pp. 258 and 336. ‘Binchs*, whom we know to bave been back in Naples in 1719
(Archivio Storico per la Province Napoletane, 1906, p. 453), must be Admiral Byng, as from 1718 Commander
of the British fleet in the Mediterranean.
• ibid., pp. 295, 332, 435-7, 444; Pascoli, H, p. 102; Zanotti, I, p. 277. In Bergamo he commissioned
his portrait from Vittore Gliislandi—Tassi, II, p. 64.
7 Harrach was the most enthusiastic Austrian patron of Neapolitan art, as can be seen from his
surviving collection—Ritschl, passim, and de Dominici, IV, pp. 46, 439, 441, 444, 571.

--- [Page 39] ---

Plate 29

--- [Page 40] ---

Plate 30
)13
dna
03
setalP
ees(
STSITRA
NAILATI
DNA
YRUTNEC
HTNEETNEVES
EHT
FO
SROTISIV
HSILGNE
seniaB
samohT
riS
ecloD
olra
C
.b
seknaB
emoreJ
:enoiznatS
omissaM
.

--- [Page 41] ---

Plate 31
mahsI
samohT
riS
:attaraM
olraC
.b
xoF
selrahC
:attaraM
olraC
..

--- [Page 42] ---

Plate 32 NEAPOLITAN ARTISTS AND FOREIGN PATRONS
a. Ribera: Drunken Silenus painted for Gaspar Roomer
b. Paolo de Matteis: The Choice of Hercules painted for Lord Shaftesbury

--- [Page 43] ---

THE INTERVENTION OF EUROPE 201
their Viennese palaces with pictures from their native land. Thus Marshal Caprara
commissioned many paintings in 'Bologna1 and, above all, the great Prince Eugene of
Savoy proved as loyal to Italy in the arts of peace as he was to Austria in those of war.
Prince Eugene was indeed the most grandiose and influential private patron in
Europe.2 His Winter Palace begun by Fischer von Erlach and the two Belvederes by
-Lucas von Hildebrandt are inspired testimonials to his passion for building; the marble
Apotheosis by Permoser which he himself designed survives as an illustration of his
megalomania if not of his taste; but his collection of pictures has been dispersed. Today
it is celebrated chiefly for the unique Flemish primitives it once contained; but to the
Italians of his own time Eugene was famous as a ‘generous protector and supreme lover
of the sine arts, especially those of our native land...’.3 He proved this by his magnificent
patronage of Italian painters and sculptors. Louis Dorigny, Marc’antonio Chiarini,
Gaetano Fanti, Carlo Carlone and others came from Italy to paint frescoes in the Upper
and Lower Belvederes; Lorenzo Mattielli and Domenico Antonio Parodi made statues
for the hall and gardens; Solimena sent altarpieces for the chapel. In the gallery hung
pictures by Crespi, whom he employed for five years, dal Sole and many other Bolo­
gnese painters4; by the Neapolitans Giacomo del Po and Solimena, and by Vittore
Ghislandi from Bergamo.5 These are only the most famous and the list could be doubled
or trebled without difficulty. From the records and inventories that have survived we
gain the impression that the subjects he loved best were those taken from the ancient
poets, especially Virgil, whose ‘portrait’ writing the Aeneid he commissioned from
Giacomo Antonio Boni in Bologna.® His taste was above all for the sumptuous and
heavy. Though he lived until 1736 he seems to have shown no interest whatsoever in
the lighter manner of the Venetians, many of whom came to work in Vienna for other
patrons.
For Prince Eugene was only one among a multitude of nobles who were com­
missioning Italian art at the time. Delivery from the Turks and then victory against the
French established the city as a great European capital—a new Rome, which rivalled
the old in its appeal to artists. Domenico Martinelli came to build the town palace of
the Liechtenstein family in 1691, and in 1704 Andrea Pozzo, who had been summoned
by the Emperor, began to paint the ceiling of the hall in their garden palace. Mattielli
made sculpture for many an aristocratic garden. Ferdinando Galli-Bibbiena produced
marvellous theatrical spectacles. Painters travelling north to Germany all stopped to.
work in Vienna. And from everywhere in Italy pictures poured in to enrich the new
collections that were being formed in the city. With its feudal aristocracy and all­
powerful religious foundations Vienna provided a civilisation that the Italians could
1 Above all by Crespi and dal Sole—Zanotti, I, p. 302, and H, p. 4$.
2 Ug, passim, and Tietze, pp. 891-907. For the fate of the collection much of which was bought by
Carlo Emanuele III of Savoy see Baudi di Vesme, 1886, pp. 161-256.
3 Zanotti, I, p. 275.
4 ibid., I, p. 302, and II, p. 43.
5 De Dominici, IV, pp. 432-3, 439.
6 Zanotti, II, p. 234.

--- [Page 44] ---

202 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
understand. It was the last conquest of the Baroque in a world whose values were
already changing.
Savoy was the other continental state which emerged transformed from the war of
the Spanish succession and here too victory was accompanied by a wonderful flowering
of the arts.1 During much of the seventeenth century the architecture of Turin had been
of European significance, but patronage of painting had been almost laughable in its
futility. Local talent was rare and attempts to attract artists from other towns had met
with a long scries of failures. Painter after painter had refused to makejhejourney north,
and successive dukes, who were in any case more addicted to hunting and military
pursuits than the cultivation of art, seemed generally resigned to the situation. Now in
his hour of triumph Victor Amadeus was able, with the help of his artistic dictator
Filippo Juvarra, to change all this. They followed the example of patrons in other
uncreative centres and attracted leading painters, or at least their pictures, from a wide
variety of more richly endowed cities. In carrying out this imaginative policy, however,
they had already been anticipated in a number of smaller provincial towns and it is to
them that we must turn in order to understand the significance of its origins and
development.
1 Claretta, i893, pp. 1-309.