# 07 CHP-7 sec i

N 1669, five years after his bitter complaints about the impossibility of finding a
Ipatron in Rome, Salvator Rosa was writing to his loyal and long suffering friend
G. B. Ricciardi that ‘every day I have to turn down commissions (and important ones at that) from all over Europe’.1 And indeed the patronage that the popes found increasingly difficult to maintain owing to the catastrophic financial and political decline of
Rome was being taken over by a wide variety of figures from outside Italy.2 Within a relatively short time a recession, so critical that it might well have inhibited the whole future of large-scale painting in Italy and turned the peninsula into a provincial backwater, was halted by foreign intervention and then actually reversed. Italian painters were soon in greater demand than ever before and they were quick to take advantage of the situation. In Messina, Don Antonio Ruffo was severely snubbed when, in 1671, he tried to get a picture from the Venetian Girolamo Forabosco.3 He would have to wait two years and he would have to pay 80 doppie for two half-length figures. It was no use, he was told, asking a painter of Forabosco’s standing for cheaper work, as he was daily implored by the greatest princes in Europe to send them something. They were ready to pay anything he asked for the smallest head and they considered it a real favour to own anything by him at all... . .
Blackmail of this kind was already commonplace. By the end of the century there were few Italian artists who did not rely upon foreign clients for a significant proportion of their commissions. Some lived in their native cities and painted for the princes and viceroys of Germany and Spain. Others found it more profitable to leave and settle in new countries. By playing off their Italian and many foreign patrons against each other these artists could claim exorbitant terms.4 Soon after the turn of the century the
Bolognese painter G. M. Crespi wrote to the Prince of Liechtenstein who wanted him to coinè to Vienna to help in the decoration of his palace that ‘I will be delighted to accept the proposed honour provided that suitable arrangements can be made between him who gives the orders and him whose duty it is to serve’.5 He then laid down his conditions: he refused to work in collaboration with an architectural painter; his
- 2 Haskell, 1959.

[Page 170]
travelling expenses and those of his servant must be paid in full; both of them must be lodged in the palace which was to be painted; he must be given two hundred Spanish doppie for every space to be filled. And so the list proceeded. Crespi was exceptionally successful, and not all artists could afford to adopt such an independent attitude. In fact, in the artistic as in other fields, the law of supply and demand was relentless, but it operated with painful clumsiness. Some foreign princes were disappointed after repeated and strenuous attempts to attract a painter; some painters of equal merit were unable, despite the most sycophantic perseverance, to arouse sufficient interest in the courts of
Europe. But in general the outlines are clear enough. Until the downfall of the Barberini the opportunities for work in Rome were so great that few foreign rulers had much chance of success when competing with the popes. With the decline of papal patronage, however, the situation was reversed and many painters became aware of the fact that there were greater opportunities for them abroad.
- n -
Ever since the High Renaissance the complete predominance of Italian art over that of all other countries had been accepted without question by the rest of Europe. During much of the sixteenth century rulers such as François I, Charles V and Philip II had spent large sums in building up collections of paintings which they acquired either through agents or directly from the artist. No one yet believed in the superiority of the
‘Old Master’, but after the deaths of Titian and Michelangelo there was a general recognition that a great creative period had come to an end, and work by these artists continued to be revered and avidly sought for in a way that had hitherto occurred only with Raphael. None the less many modern painters were still greatly esteemed, and artists from all over Europe were drawn to Italy as much by the reputations of her existing masters as by the memory of those who had only recently died. And then, at the beginning of the seventeenth century, new stars appeared on the horizon. ‘Some painters have made marvellous progress and improved their art’, wrote the Flemish artist Carel van Mander in Amsterdam1; ‘among them there is one called Carracci, who is lodged by the illustrious Cardinal Farnese for whom he has painted many excellent works, especially a beautiful gallery which is so exquisitely painted in fresco that people say that it surpasses the manner of all other artists and that its beauty cannot be expressed. Another man working in Rome is someone called Michelangelo da
Caravaggio, who does wonderful things.....” Such was the heady news that reached the North and turned the concentration of patrons once more to Rome and to Italy.
Throughout the first three or four decades of-the seventeenth century we find frequent references in artistic literature to the odd commission from abroad, but these were busy times in Rome itself and few foreign princes could make much of an impact.
Only one power was so firmly established in the peninsula that her rulers could compete on almost equal terms with the popes for the services of the leading Italian artists. Lords of Milan and Naples, enjoying the closest economic collaboration with Genoa and able

[Page 171]
at times to apply decisive pressure on Rome, the Spaniards commissioned important works from painters in all four cities. It was in Naples, above all, that they were active.
The viceroys maintained there a form of government which is still proverbial for its combination of ceremonial and exploitation, and in these conditions the visual arts flourished as never before. Moreover, Spanish love of the picaresque and a tendency to mock that classical mythology which still meant so much to Italian humanists gave a special imprint to painting in the city, exemplified in the cruel realism and grimy
‘philosophers’ of Ribera and his followers. The viceroys, almost without exception, employed these artists to decorate churches, palaces and galleries, and on their return to Spain they took back with them large and influential collections.
It was, however, a frequent practice to appoint as viceroy a man who had already served for some years as ambassador in Rome,1 and this sometimes led to his developing a taste at odds with that of the subjects whom he later ruled.'We find a striking example of this in the career of the Count of Monterey, the most conspicuous Spanish patron in Italy during the first half of the century. This small, vain, greedy man, whose features showed ‘a certain ugly majesty’, owed his position to the influence of his brother-in-law, the King’s favourite, Count-Duke Olivarez.2 In Rome, where he welcomed Velasquez in 1630, he purchased ‘une infinité de beaus originaus de Raphaël et du Titien et autres excellents peintres’,3 among which were two pictures of such outstanding importance that they were perforce acquired for the King. Titian’s Bacchanal and Worship of Venus, which had so intoxicated Roman artists when in the collection of Cardinal Aldobrandini, had passed into the possession of the Hispanophil Ludovisi family. It was from them that Monterey managed to buy these masterpieces to the natural grief and indignation of all Italians.4
Monterey had also made contact with a number of contemporary painters and sculptors and when he was transferred to Naples in 1631 he wished to go on employing them. This was not altogether easy. Neapolitan artists were ferociously jealous of competition and were prepared to threaten violence in order to enforce their monopoly of local commissions. When Domenichino came to the city in 1631 to paint frescoes in the cathedral, he found himself compelled to seek the Viceroy’s protection. This
Monterey was prepared to give on his own terms: he insisted on the artist breaking his contract with the ecclesiastical authorities and working for him instead.5 Lanfranco, who had come to Naples to paint frescoes in the Jesuit church, was also employed by
Monterey, who commissioned from him pictures in his palace and altarpieces for the
Augustinian convent and church which he had founded in Salamanca. When the sculptor Giuliano Finelli, of Neapohtan parentage, came from Rome to work in the

[Page 172]
During all this time King Philip IV, whose appetite for painting was by no means satiated by the employment of Rubens and Velasquez, remained deeply interested in the
Roman scene. In 1628 his ambassador commissioned one of Guido Reni’s largest, most splendid and romantic compositions, The Abduction of Helen, to be followed three years later by an even finer pendant of The Death of Dido from Guercino in Bologna; but owing to some diplomatic confusion neither picture was sent to Madrid.3 Then, in about 1636, an agent of the King negotiated an ambitious commission for a set of more than a dozen large landscape paintings each of which was to include the figure of some hermit or anchorite.4 These were designed to decorate the palace of Buen Retiro which was being built at this very time on the site of a monastery of Jeronymites. The choice of subjects given to the artists is therefore self-explanatory: equally clear is the reason why Philip found it necessary to turn to Rome for the series. The type of picture in which landscape and figures balance each other in composition and echo each other in mood had been created in Venice in the early sixteenth century and then largely neglected until its reappearance in Rome about a hundred years later. Though the initial impulse for -this revival had come from the classically minded Annibale
Carracci and Domenichino, the convention had been greatly enriched by the more picturesque and irrational contributions of Northern artists, who by the 1620s and 1630s enjoyed almost a monopoly of the genre. It was practised mainly by the young Claude, by a number of Flemish painters, of whom the most-distinguished was probably Jan
Both, and, to a lesser extent, by Nicolas Poussin. All of them were only just beginning to makenames sorthemselves anditwas precisely to them that the King of Spainnow turned.

[Page 173]
It has been acutely pointed out by M. Marcel Rothlisberger that only a man who was in close touch with the véry latest developments in Roman art and also fully aware of Philip IV’s requirements could have been responsible for such an adventurous commission; and the same author has indicated one man who had both these qualifications. Giovanni Battista Crescenzi, who was born in 1577, came of a noble Roman family. His brother was a cardinal and the two men were not only enthusiastic patrons and collectors but also among the very first to employ Claude, who painted frescoes in their palace. Moreover, both were devoted to the Spanish cause. Giovanni Battista went to Spain ‘ostensibly to serve as an architect, but some say that this is a pretext and that what he really plans to build is his [the Cardinal’s] career as Pope’.1 The Venetian ambassador was being too suspicious, for Crescenzi really did practise architecture and he played an essential rôle in the building of the Buen Retiro. It is therefore more than likely that either he himself, on a quick visit to Rome, of his brother, who was living there, ordered the landscapes. This was, in any case, the most important foreign commission placed in Italy during the first half of the seventeenth century. For Claude it was decisive. In all he painted several other large landscapes, besides those with hermits, for the King of Spain, and these firmly secured his reputation as the leading practitioner in the genre. Poussin painted one or possibly two which were among his earliest ventures into the field, and, in general, the whole school of landscape painting was given a vital impulse which helped to establish its respectability.
Only one other nation was in a position to rival Spain in the claims that it could make on Italian artists. Throughout the century French monarchs, statesmen and princes kept at least one eye turned to the south, but the extent of their actual patronage varied greatly with the confusing developments of international politics.
‘On dit queje suis chiche, mais je fais trois choses bien éloignées d’avarice, car je fais la guerre, je fais l’amour et je bâtis’, boasted Henry IV.2 His assertion of the royal supremacy through great works of architecture was of revolutionary and decisive importance for the whole history of Paris; but, consciously or not, it was an essentially patriotic’ programme, put into effect almost entirely by French architects and craftsmen
—the first large-scale enterprise of the kind to be executed without Italian help or even specific Italian models in mind. Such a policy was justified by its triumphant success; but in the field of painting it led only to the provincial decoration of latter-day Manner-
- ists such as Toussaint du Breuil and Ambroise Dubois. Henri’s wife, however, was not a Medici for nothing, and it was largely under her guidance that a certain Italian influence began to make itself felt in Paris.
Historians are agreed that Marie de Medici was never very intelligent and always excessively stubborn in defence of the two causes that were nearest her heart: pleasure and power.3 Nor was her taste in any way remarkable. But she was closely related to two of the most cultivated families in Italy—the Medici in Florence (she was the niece

[Page 174]
of Grand Duke Ferdinand) and the Gonzaga in Mantua (her sister married Duke
Vincenzo)—and she was able to put these connections to good use." On her arrival in
Paris in 1601 she was horrified by the Louvre—‘more fit for a prison than for the home of a great prince’—and she stayed for a time in the splendid palace of the Gondi, a
Florentine family which had settled in Paris some fifty years earlier. The garden especially was famous and the King was-so struck by a fountain of Orpheus enchanting the wild beasts, made by the Flemish-Florentine sculptor Pietro Francavilla, that he summoned him to Paris where he soon arrived with his assistant and future son-in-law Francesco
Bordoni.1 It was in 1604 that Marie undertook her first important service to the arts.
She persuaded her uncle the Grand Duke to commission an equestrian statue of Henri
IV from Francavilla’s master, Giambologna. This was to be placed on the newly built
Pont Neus. So impatient was she for the monument to arrive that she even asked
Ferdinand to dismantle the one that had been made for himself and to send her the horse on which sat his own effigy. She explained that there would be plenty of opportunity for him to have it replaced at leisure. It need hardly be said that this request was not granted, and the monument, which was completed by Pietro Tacca and Francavilla, did not arrive for another ten years.2
From Florence Marie then turned her attention to Mantua and summoned to
Paris the painter who is most associated with the earlier part of her reign, the Flemish
Franz Pourbus the Younger. He arrived in 1609 and painted many portraits of her and the court. On the whole, however, while Henri IV was still alive, Marie confined her artistic interests largely to jewelry, silverware and other crafts. But after his assassination in 1610 she grew more ambitious as her regency became ever more disastrous. In 1611 she ordered her architect Salomon de Brosse to build for her a huge palace on the site of the one which she had bought from the due du Luxembourg. Once again she looked to Florence for inspiration and she wrote to her aunt the Grand Duchess for the plans of the Palazzo Pitti on which she hoped that the new building would be based.3 In fact it was designed on wholly different lines and the work was in any case held up by the internal problems in which she soon became involved. By 1620 she was back in power and anxious to impress the world with the nature of her triumph. This she did through a commission so spectacular in conception and achievement that it overshadows everything else in her life. It was in 1621 that Rubens, himself probably chosen because ofhis connections with the court of Mantua, was approached and asked to paint the two long galleries in her new palace with allegorical scenes of her life and that of her husband.
The project is of such immeasurable importance that it must at least be referred to; yet, in a chapter devoted to the work of Italian artists,„more attention must inevitably be paid to another painter who entered her service not long afterwards, the Tuscan Orazio
Gentileschi.4 He arrived in 1623 after sending a picture in advance from Genoa, and

[Page 175]
stayed for less than two years, discouraged no doubt by -the welcome given to Rubens.
During that time, however, he painted a number of pictures, the influence of which has been traced on the styles of artists as different as Louis Le Nain, Laurent de la Hyre and Philippe de Champaigne. Only one certain commission from Marie de Medici survives, but it is entirely typical of her interests at this time. It is a large allegorical painting of Public Felicity triumphant over Dangers (Plate 25)—a magnificent female figure holding the attributes of French royalty who gazes, defiant and yet serene, at the tempestuous storm clouds above her.
Marie de Medici was not the only ruler who was obsessively concerned with the promotion of her personal prestige. In 1624, while Rubens and Gentileschi were making use of all their gifts to this effect, her nephew Ferdinando, now Duke ofMantua, was worried by similar problems. He was most anxious to be addressed as ‘Altesse’ by the French court and he wrote to his ambassador in Paris for advice.1 In reply he was ” told that pictures for the new palace would make a suitable gift. This answer must have delighted him, for Ferdinando like his father Vincenzo was a fanatical collector and patron who employed many of the leading artists in Italy, above all that most sensitive and poetic of painters Domenico Fetti. He therefore proposed sending ten pictures of
Apollo and the Muses which Giovanni Baglione had brought with him from Rome a few years earlier. Marie especially asked that the Muses should not be ‘tout á fait núes, ni trop lascives’, but otherwise her reactions to the bribe are not known. On one man, however, they did make a great, if only indirect, impact. They turned the attention of her minister, Cardinal Richelieu, to Mantua whence he—and so many others—were soon to obtain treasures of incalculably greater importance than anything that poor
Baglione could paint.
Yet Richelieu, though ‘le plus grand ministre de la France et le plus Alustre de ses amateurs’, plays little part in this story.2 In Italy he made use of agents.of all kinds to acquire such masterpieces as the pictures painted for Isabella d’Este’s studiolo by Perugino,
Mantegna, Costa and Correggio—but all these artists were long since dead. For most of his career his dealings with the living were confined to Frenchmen and Flemings such as Simon Vouet, Philippe de Champaigne and Rubens. Indeed, even when he turned to Italy it was at first to commission the works of another Frenchman, Nicolas
Poussin, from whom in 1635 he ordered three Bacchanals for his chateau at Richelieu.
And then during the last few years of his life he suddenly embarked on a new policy of trying to bring to Paris all the leading artists south of the Alps.
The reasons for Richelieu’s volte face are not hard to fathom. He must by now have heard with some envy of the triumphant success of the Barberini, who had turned
Rome into a permanent memorial to their glory, and he must have realised that for all his encouragement there was no comparable talent avaflable in Paris. Above all, an
Italian protege of his, Giulio Mazzarini, was beginning to play an important role in
French politics. Throughout 1639 Richelieu was using all his pressure to have him made

[Page 176]
a cardinal and at the very end of that year he persuaded him to settle in France.1 Soon
Mazarin was appointed as delegate to represent French interests at the Congress of
Cologne and thereafter he acted exclusively for the French court. In view of his nationality, his love of art and the vital rôle he was later to play in the pokey of attracting
Italians to Paris, it is not unreasonable to give him the credit for having initiated it.
Early in 1639 Poussin wrote to his friend Jean Lemaire that he was worried by these developments.2 He reaksed that the best Italian painters were still far too well treated in
Rome for them to want to accept French offers and he thought that only second-rate men ‘autour desquels les François s’abusent très grossièrement’ would be likely to go.
In the event his prophecy proved accurate enough. Some months earker pressure had been put on him and the sculptor Duquesnoy to come to France, but both men had jibbed, and Poussin had laid down the most demanding conditions. To his surprise, and no doubt to his regret, these were accepted, and in May 1640 the Surintendant des
Bâtiments sent his agent, Paul-Fréart de Chantelou, to Rome to bring back Poussin and with him the ‘plus excellents peintres, sculpteurs, architectes et autres fameux artisans’. All of them, it was hoped, would respond to the appeals made by Mazarin and his friends in the upper reaches of Roman society.3 One of the artists they wished to attract was Pietro da Cortona4; another was Guercino.5 But it soon became clear that they had aimed too high. By October, after a series of refusals from everyone concerned, Chantelou had to be content with escorting Poussin and a few quite secondary painters. Even this limited success had been achieved only by using the most extreme pressure ranging from ugly threats to bribery. Two other positive results emerged from Richelieu’s Italian pokey. The briUiant etcher and draughtsman Stefano deka Bella, who came to Paris in the service of the Florentine ambassador, found the chmate sufficiently encouraging to settle and work there for ten years.6 And, after much begging, the Barberini finally allowed Bernini (and his pupils) to make a bust of the
Cardinal, the most tremendous and dangerous of their so-called akies. This was almost certainly derived from a triple portrait by Phikppe de Champaigne and it arrived in
Paris in August 1641—cold, aloof and elegant—little more than a year before the death of its subject.7
Richelieu’s death in no way interfered with French plans, as the Surintendant hastened to inform ‘toute la troupe des vertueux’ which now included Pietro da
Cortona, Alessandro Algardi, François Duquesnoy and Poussin, who after an unfruitful two years in Paris had just got back to Rome on the pretext of fetching his wife.8 At long last Duquesnoy agreed to go to Paris—only to die as he was about to set sail from
Livorno.9 This disaster merely spurred Mazarin, who had now replaced Richekeu, to more ambitious heights. Early in 1644 he made a determined effort to get Bernini himself to settle in France by offering him a huge salary. He was reckoning without Urban VIII,

[Page 177]
who, although nearly on his deathbed, still retained his authority over the great artist.
‘You are made for Rome and Rome is made for you’, he is reported to have told him— words powerful enough to detain Bernini even when this munificent patron died and bad days followed.1
And so the utmost exertions by the most vigorous of European nations had almost wholly failed to compete with the attractions of the Barberini regime. English efforts to dislodge the principal Italian artists met with very similar results.
The passionate love of art felt by Lord Arundel, Charles I and a few of his courtiers is too well known to need stressing.2 Equally familiar is the story of the King’s purchase of the Duke of Mantua’s collection of pictures and the great repercussions that this had on other European rulers.3 By 1638 Gabriel Naudé could already write, in terms that were to become so familiar in the eighteenth century, that some pictures in which he was interested would probably go to Lord Arundel, ‘who leaves no stone unturned in his efforts to strip Italy osali her precious treasures’.4 Yet we hear very much less of the repeated failures of Charles I and his agents to patronise Italian artists and encourage them to come to England—failures that have been largely forgotten in our fully justified satisfaction over his employment of Rubens and Van Dyck. There is reason to believe that the King himself saw matters in rather a different light.
Charles I and his ministers were making a conscious effort to break down the isolation between England and Rome that had lasted ever since the most ferocious years of the Counter-Reformation.5 His own wife and many of his courtiers were
Catholic; conversions were not infrequent; the penal laws remained in force but were applied with much less rigour. In Rome reciprocal gestures were made: Englishmen could travel there without fear of the Inquisition—indeed they were warmly welcomed by Cardinal Barberini—and diplomatic exchanges were encouraged. With this political relaxation came a growing English respect for contemporary Italian culture. The new
Catholic humanism appealed to many who had been repelled by the intransigeance of the previous half-century and, in any case, the rise of connoisseurship promoted a certain discrimination between the aesthetic merits of a work of art and its representational content. Such sophistication was, however, characteristic only of a small, privileged élite, and, as puritan objection to the court increased, it became more and more difficult to maintain. The whole precarious balance broke down in 1642, but the tensions had been there from the start and must be taken into account in any estimate of Charles’s artisricpolicy.
Almost as soon as he came to the throne in 1625 the new King made his first attempt to bring a leading Italian painter to England. After seeing a picture of Semiramis by Guercino he offered the Bolognese artist the most favourable terms if he would
non hanno guardato a spesa per haver pitture di qual si voglia sorte’—A. Venturi, p. 252.

[Page 178]
settle at his court. But, we are told, Guercino ‘refused to accept, as he did not want to have dealings with heretics and thus contaminate his angelic character; nor did he want to undertake such a dreadful journey in a climate so different from that of his own country’.1 It may have been immediately after this that Charles ‘invited Albano into
England in a letter written with his own hand’.2 Whether it was the climate or the heretics that worried Albani is not known, but he too declined the offer. Nor was
Charles any more successful with the sculptor Pietro Tacca whom he wished to come to London ‘to make two horses for him’; the Grand Duke of Tuscany refused to authorise the visit.3 However, after some perseverance, the King managed to get both his painter and his sculptor, though neither was of the stature he had originally hoped for.
Orazio Gentileschi had already been working for some time in Paris when he was induced to come to England, probably at the end of 1625/ He had there begun to shed the strong Caravaggist influence of earlier years and had developed a lighter, less idiosyncratic, more decorative style. In England, where he was enthusiastically welcomed by Charles and the Duke of Buckingham, this process was carried still further, though his easel pictures retained a rather intimate, informal narrative approach to
Biblical subjects which need not have offended any but the most rabid Protestant. His large-scale commissions were equally harmless politically—Stuart propaganda for the
Divine Right of Kings was entrusted to the far abler brush of Rubens—and less up to date artistically. On a ceiling of the Queen’s house, built by Inigo Jones, he painted canvases of the Muses and Virtues which looked back to Veronese and the Libreria in
Venice. They are now badly worn and were probably never very distinguished. Gentileschi was old, tired and homesick, and, as in Paris, he found himself surpassed by the ubiquitous Rubens.5
Charles I was just as keen to employ an Italian sculptor and in about 1635 his efforts were rewarded.' Francesco Fanelli, the ‘one-eyed Italian’, was a Florentine brought up in the traditions of Giambologna, Pietro Tacca and Francavilla. His work in England was almost entirely confined to small-scale bronzes whose restricted subject-matter— horses and portraits—seems like a parody of the perennial national taste but in fact reflected the special interests of one of his principal patrons, the Duke of Newcastle.
The Duke was governor of Charles, Prince of Wales, and an enthusiastic rider. For him and his circle Fanelli ransacked sacred and profane literature to dignify his portrayals of the horse. He also made an attractive little bust of the young Prince and another of the King, whose features he caught in a work of great distinction though the expression is somewhat strained and the eyes lifeless (Plate 27a).

[Page 179]
Fanelli’s reputation in England was such that Lord Arundel planned to employ him on his tomb. But Charles’s imagination was clearly stirred by more exalted visions.
He used all his influence to obtain the authorisation of the Barberini for Bernini himself to carve his portrait, and by playing on the Pope’s hopes and fears for English Catholics he achieved his aim. In July 1637 the bust, which was based on a triple portrait by Van
Dyck, reached England. There it could be seen that Bernini, despite his reverence for royal splendour, had captured from Charles’s favourite painter all the poetic and dandified melancholy that has so endeared the King to subsequent generations—-and that was so appreciated-by the sitter himself. Charles was delighted and loaded Bernini with rich presents while plans were put in hand for another bust to be made of the Queen.1
Meanwhile his courtiers were intoxicated by the possibilities that appeared to open before them. Thomas Baker, who took Van Dyck’s portrait to Rome, just managed to get the master to -record his own fantastical features before the Pope, unwilling to devalue his original concession, clamped down on further English commissions.2 Lord
Arundel was less successful. T send by Francesco a Picture of my owne and my little
Tom bye me’, he wrote in November 1636 to William Petty in Rome,3 ‘and desire it may be done at Florence in marble Basso rilievo, to try a yonge Sculptor there whoe is said to be valente Huomo, Francesco hath his name. I could wish Cavaliere Bernino, or
Fra[ncesco Fi]a mengo [Duquesnoy], might doe another of the [sam]e.’ But he wished in vain.
Many contemporary works of art reached England from Italy before 1642. We hear for instance that the King commissioned a number of paintings from Angelo
Caroselli4; and Cardinal Barberini sent the Queen so many pictures that she put them on view in her private chapel at Somerset House—a particularly tactless gesture as there were already complaints that the King was being deceived by ‘gifts of paintings, antique idols and such like trumperies brought from Rome’.5 The most famous of all these gifts was Guido Reni’s large Bacchus and Ariadne, but the picture arrived when the civil war was already on the verge of breaking out and it was soon in French hands.6 Bernini’s bust of the Queen had to be cancelled, Fanelli hurried off to Paris, and at about the same time Gentileschi died.
— iii —
The 1640s and 1650s mark a turning-point in the dissemination of Italian art abroad.
In 1644 Pope Urban VIII died and, soon after, his nephews fled from Rome, thus removing from the scene by far the most important source of patronage in Italy. By the same year an Italian amateur of sine taste and insatiable appetite was in total control of French affairs. In 1648 peace at last returned to Germany and Central Europe, and
- 1 Wittkower, 1955, p. 201.

[Page 180]
thereafter recovery from the devastation of the Thirty Years War led to a new demand for Italian artjust when England under the Puritans seemed to be losing interest. Whereas the period so far chronicled witnessed the powers struggling in vain to share in the marvellous flowering of the Italian Baroque, the second half of the century saw a comparative decline in talent accompanied now by Italian efforts to win a place in the new European balance of power. But this was not immediately obvious.
Cardinal Mazarin, who took over the government of France immediately on the death of Richelieu in 1642, had been born forty years earlier in a little village in the
Abruzzi. He was educated by the Jesuits in Rome and soon entered the service of the
Colonna for whom his father worked as intendant. He accompanied Girolamo Colonna to Spain and then served as captain of a regiment raised by the family to reconquer the
Valtellina in North Italy. There his very great diplomatic ability attracted the attention of
Giovanni Francesco Sacchetti, brother of Giulio and Marcello, and he soon became a - special protégé of that all-powerful family. His position was further strengthened by the support of the Bentivoglio, who, as has been pointed out in an earlier chapter, were always on the alert for new talent. With such powerful backing he could hardly fail, and he was soon acting under Cardinal Antonio Barberini who was trying to put an end to the war between France and Spain over the succession of Mantua. It was in connection with this problem that Mazarin pulled off his most brilliant diplomatic coup and almost single handed fulfilled the Pope’s highest hopes of him. He returned to
Rome in 1632.
He was handsome, cunning and ambitious and he moved in the very highest ranks of the most brilliant social circles in Europe. He was befriended by the greatest families of the day, and he chose as his mistress Leonora Baroni, the singer whose fabulous success inaugurated the long and frenzied tradition of operatic ‘stardom’.1 The families with whom he was especially associated—the Barberini, the Sacchetti and the Bentivoglio— were all exceptional art patrons and it is certain that Mazarin now acquired that passion for collecting which never left him. It is much less certain how and in what way he expressed it. He was not yet rich, though the Bentivoglio apparently lent him money2 and he had been appointed to a canonry of S. Giovanni in Laterano which brought him in a regular income. Most reports speak of him as mean where his own money was at stake, though always ready to spend that of others on himself. In view of all this it is significant that the artist from whom he first seems to have commissioned paintings was
Poussin3: the nationality was suitable for a patron just beginning to show his political sympathies; the price was doubtless reasonable as Poussin was not yet celebrated; the artist was easily accessible in the centre of the Barberini circle yet not engaged on official commissions. Poussin may have painted for Mazarin two of his most beautiful pictures
—the Inspiration du Poète and Diana and Endymion.4 Like the poesie of Giorgione and the

[Page 181]
young Titian, to which they owe so much, both are bathed, in golden light and, although the subject of the former has not yet been fully determined, both look back to the lyric poets of antiquity and the world of fable and mythology which, as we know from other sources, so strongly appealed to Mazarin. Thereafter he took no further interest in
Poussin’s career and when, many years later, his taste was analysed by the intelligent, malicious and not wholly accurate courtier Loménie de Brienne he was reproached for his neglect of the artist’s mature, severe and classical pictures.1 When due account has been made for Brienne’s prejudices his description of Mazarin emerges as consistent and generally convincing: a passionate enthusiast, unscrupulous in his ambition to acquire pictures, yet fastidious, almost effeminate, in his love of objets d’art and finery. We can visualise him, his beautifully expressive hands bathed in perfume, discussing the merits of some new acquisition with other amateurs and artists and carefully selecting exactly where to place it, for JSon Eminence n avoit point de plus grand plaisir qu’ à ranger son garde-meuble et qu’à placer en symétrie, dans les armoires diverses, dont il est plein, ses superbes buffets d’argent et de vermeil doré, ses vases de porphyre, de porcelaine de la Chine, ses cristaux et ses aigues-marines, et mille autres raretés dont il faisoit ses délices... . .’2
As yet this rich life of the senses was only just opening up to him. Increasing duties kept him away from Rome for years at a time as his association with France grew closer and closer, and he finally settled in Paris early in 1640 and was made Cardinal at the end of the following year. By the middle of 1643 both Richelieu and Louis XIII were dead and he was able to satisfy his artistic tastes and ambitions on an unparalleled scale...
It has already been pointed out that Mazarin’s earliest attempts to attract Italian artists to France, made while Urban VIII was still alive, met with no success. He not only failed to get Bernini to enlarge the palace that he had forcibly acquired from the financier Jacques Tubeuf; he was at first not even able to bring to Paris some of the best
Italian musicians, including his former mistress Leonora Baroni. But he was determined to make use of Italian artists of all kinds. It was the change of régime in Rome that made this possible. Early in 1646 Francesco Barberini fled from the persecution of Innocent X and arrived in Paris to put himself under the protection of his former protégé, Mazarin.
Back in Rome his favourite painter Giovan Francesco Romanelli began to suffer from the-first cold winds of neglect and hostility. A suitable arrangement was easily reached and by June Romanelli was already at work painting the newly built upper gallery of
Mazarin’s palace (Plate 26a).3 The artist proposed a series of Roman histories. But the
Cardinal ‘showed that he preferred the Metamorphoses of vid as being gayer and comforming more to the taste of the country’.4 The choice was wholly characteristic, as has been seen from the account of his probable relations with Poussin. It was also

[Page 182]
a wise one in view of the nature of Romanelli’s talents. He was clearly far more at home in scenes of erotic or Arcadian feeling, such as Ariadne being woken by Love, Narcissus or
Romulus and Remus (Plate 26b) than in those, such as Jupiter sending down his Thunderbolts on the Gods, where a more martial spirit was required. Glorification of Mazarin was out of the question in view of his nominal dependence on the boy King Louis XIV and the Regent Anne of Austria, and in any case the long tunnel vault of the narrow gallery was scarcely adapted to a great unified fresco as in the Palazzo Barberini. In the event,
Romanelli divided the area into a number of oval, circular, rectangular and square compartments separated from each other by frames of gilt stucco. His figures are somewhat pale, academic and lacking in energy, and paradoxically enough, these frescoes played their part in conditioning French taste against the more exuberant and vital creations of the true Italian Baroque...
These early years of Mazarin’s rule were important ones for the diffusion of Italian art. Operas, ballets, fashions of all sorts, as well as pictures, sculptures and works of elaborate craftsmanship were constantly arriving in Paris. In 1645 Giacomo Torelli, the most distinguished of all Italian stage designers, was sent there by the Duke of Parma for whom he had been working, and the beauty of his decors, as well as the elaboration of the new techniques which he introduced, attracted (as they had done in Italy) far more attention than the operas for which they were designed.1 Then in 1648, soon after the departure of Romanelli, the Bolognese painter Giovanni Francesco Grimaldi came to complete the decoration of the Cardinal’s gallery, by painting landscapes in theniches and embrasures of the windows.2 In Rome, and indeed all over Italy, potentates who were anxious to secure his favour sent him pictures. His old friend the Marchese Bentivoglio had started the process as early as 1639 by commissioning for him a Caritd
Romana by Guercino.3 Some years later Mazarin himself acquired three further paintings direct from the artist—a St Peter, a genre picture of a girl with a basket of fruit, and a
Venus mourning over the Death ofAdonis In 1647 we find him commissioning a landscape with the Flight into Egypt from Claude.6 And so the process continued.
Mazarin’s ambitions to bring Italian artists to Paris had not been satisfied by the arrival of Romanelli and Grimaldi. In 1648 he wrote personally to Algardi and tried, through the most generous offers, to persuade him to reverse his refusal 0's some six years earlier. So advantageous were the terms proposed that the sculptor was on the point of departing when once again papal policy interfered. Algardi occupied the same pre-eminent position in the Pamfili court as Bernini had held in that of the Barberini.
However mean Innocent X and his nephew might be, they could scarcely allow their principal artist to leave Rome, and so ‘they made him so many offers, so many promises,

[Page 183]
plied him with so much flattery and aroused in him so many hopes that they made him change his mind and cancel all his contracts [with the French]’.1
Mazarin’s assumption of power in France strengthened his position in Rome itself despite the hostility of the Pope. Soon after 1644 he bought the great palace of his one-time patrons, the Bentivoglio, and planned to use it for distinguished French visitors to the city.2 Though he himself never returned to see once again the rooms where he had been received as an obscure and ambitious young diplomat, the thought that he owned the vast palace, whose casino contained the world-famous fresco of Aurora painted by Guido Reni for Scipione Borghese, must have given him intense satisfaction.
Soon afterwards he commissioned, through Paolo Maccarani, an agent in Rome, the architect Martino Longhi the Younger to add a façade to the church of SS. Vincenzo ed
Anastasio in the Piazza di Trevi.3 Mazarin himself could exert only little control over the architecture, and as the work dragged on he became increasingly harassed by economic difficulties. ‘We are always talking about building,’ he wrote to Maccarani shortly before his death in 1661, ‘and yet it might be better to think of building for ourselves a certain and everlasting room in Paradise.’ But such hesitations did not last and already the triumphantly bold façade served to proclaim the splendour and arrogance of the Cardinal’s authority in the very centre of fashionable Rome.
In 1649 Mazarin’s patronage of Italian artists met with a disastrous, though temporary, set-back. The first Fronde—that strange and shifting alliance of aristocratic and bourgeois factions—turned against the Cardinal with great violence. The political implications of the affair are far too complex to warrant investigation here, and it need only.be said that one of the special targets of Mazarin’s enemies was his employment of
Italian artists in the field of music and painting—described in a coarse and cheap little lampoon as ‘de ridicules personnages/Avec de lascives images’. Giacomo Torelli was financially ruined and imprisoned for many months.4 Stefano della Bella rushed back to Italy after a narrow escape from lynching.5 Giovanni Francesco Grimaldi had to hide in a Jesuit seminary before he too managed to get back home.
- The next four years saw a series of fantastic reversals of fortune in Mazarin’s position. A return to power followed by exile; marches and counter-marches; sudden changes of alliance; the sale of his library and threatened dispersal of all his collections
The exact-date of the transaction is not certain, but it must have been before 1647—d’Aumale, p. 8. See also Callari, p. 298.

[Page 184]
alternating with vital new purchases. For in the middle of these troubles, Charles I in England was being faced with far more ruthless and successful opponents, and his execution, followed by Parliament’s sale ofhis picture gallery, put on to the international market the most remarkable treasures in European history. Somehow, in the intervals of his difficulties, Mazarin managed to take an interest in these affairs across the Channel and commissioned the rich German banker Everard Jabach to buy for him a number of pictures from the collection of his former rival.1
By 1653 Mazarin was firmly back in power again and found that the vast majority ofhis paintings had survived the threats to which they had been exposed. An inventory was at once drawn up and from it we can gauge the extent ofhis collecting and patronage during the previous twenty years.2 He owned some 500 pictures which, apart from Old Masters, had mostly been painted by artists with whomhehadbecomefamiliar in his younger days in Italy. Guido Reni and Guercino were the best represented of seventeenth-century painters, but he also owned works by Sacchi and Pietro da Cortona among the Barberini favourites. To this taste he remained faithful all his life, paying almost no attention to the developments in Italian painting that had taken place since his departure or to pictures painted in cities other than Rome and Bologna. Nor did he modify his position now that he had the chance to resume collecting. Among all the works that he acquired between 1653 and his death in 1661 there is only one—a Landscape with Apollo by Salvator Rosa—painted by an artist whom he had not known when living in Italy.3 So many of the pictures in Mazarin’s gallery were given to him by friends and clients that it is not always-easy to understand his own taste from an investigation of their quality and subject-matfer, but when we have specific evidence of direct commissions by him we see that he nearly always preferred to choose profane, even erotic, themes. The accusations ofhis enemies about ‘lascives images’, though grotesque when applied to a Titian or a Correggio, are not wholly incomprehensible.
Perhaps the best way of estimating Mazarin’s taste is to compare it with that ofhis contemporary, Louis Phélipeaux de la Vrillière, a secretary of state.4 Brienne said that he would prefer ‘quatre tableaux de la galerie de la Vrillière à tous ceux du Cardinal
Mazarin si l’on en excepte les trois Corrège et la Venus du Titien’. In bis palace, specially built for him by François Mansart, La'Vrillière kept splendid paintings by most of the artists represented in Mazarin’s apartments. But the accent was very different. Far from finding that mythological subjects ‘conformed more to the taste of the country’, La
Vrillière chose from the artists he employed themes taken from the high, heroic world of antiquity. Some time before 1635 he acquired a large and famous picture by Guido
Reni of The Rape of Helen which had been purchased by Marie de Medici a few years

[Page 25]
Gentileschi: Public Felicity triumphant over Dangers

[Page 26]
a. Nanteuil: The Cardinal in his gallery b. R : Romulus and Remus from ceiling of gallery in Palais Mazarin

[Page 27]
SROTPLUCS
NAILATI
DNA
YTLAYOR
N
GIER
OF
VIX
siuoL
:
ininreB.b
I
selrahC
:illenaF
ocsecnarF
..

[Page 28]
a. Cagnacci: Death of Cleopatra

[Page 185]
earlier. He followed this with a commission to Guercino for a Scene from the Life of Cato, and in 1637 he ordered from Poussin Camillus handing the Schoolmaster of the Falerii to his
Pupils. The subject was chosen from Livy and told of the generosity of the Roman republican hero Camillus who when besieging Falerium refused the offer of a schoolmaster to deliver his pupils as hostages and handed over the treacherous teacher to be stripped and beaten by the schoolboys all the way back to town. It is one of Poussin’s largest paintings, austere, harsh and brutal. In the 1640s La Vrilliere added to these a series of paintings by Guercino [The War between the Romans and the Sabines and
Coriolanus and his Mother), Pietro da Cortona (Caesar restoring Cleopatra to her usurped
Throne, The Sibyl announcing the Birth of Christ to Augustus and the Finding of Romulus and Remus) and Alessandro Turchi (The Death of Cleopatra'). The series was completed some years later with Augustus closing the Temple of Janus by Carlo Maratta. Even a bare list of the titles of these ten huge paintings is enough to indicate the differences in taste between La Vrilliere and Mazarin. On the one hand we have the France of Corneille and the elaborate ‘Spanish’ tragedies of the early seventeenth century; on the other the world of Italian opera and ballet, of refinement and delicacy. Yet from one point of view both men shared the same ideals. For while they continued to look to Italy for their artists, a different group of patrons, made up mostly of bankers, lawyers and merchants, was beginning to reject the attractions of contemporary Italian painting and develop what was later to be considered a more specifically French taste for reticence and classicism. Neither quality was especially attractive to La Vrilliere or Mazarin.
When Mazarin returned to Paris in 1653, the sale of Charles I’s pictures in London was still proceeding. He was now far better placed to acquire some of the finest of them than he had been three years earlier. Through his ambassador M. de Bordeaux he was able to buy Correggio’s Jupiter and Antiope, Titian’s Venus of the Pardo, and a number of Van Dycks, including The Children of Charles 1.1 Perhaps it was because even he was satisfied by this fabulous haul that his collecting and patronage much decreased during the last years of his life. Romanelli was called back to Paris in 1655 but worked exclusively for the Queen Mother in the Louvre: this time he was encouraged to paint the
Roman histories which Mazarin had rejected nine years earlier.2 Gaspare Vigarani was summoned from Mantua in 1659 to build a theatre in Mazarin’s palace, but found that there was not enough space and moved to the Tuileries instead.3 Mazarin was still the promoter of all these enterprises but, as if foreshadowing the coming rule of Louis XTV, they were executed far more in the name of the monarch than under his own aegis.
Perhaps the hostility of the Fronde had had some effect. None the less his passion for
Italian precious brocades and stuffs of all kinds was as strong as ever, and these he continued to acquire with febrile voracity.4 A month before his death he paid a last visit to his pictures, and the account given by Brienne of this occasion, familiar though it is, is too beautiful and too relevant not to be quoted once more5: ‘ je me promenois

[Page 186]
à quelques jours de là dans les appartements neufs de son palais’ et j’étois dans la petite galerie que étoit tapissée de Scipion tout de laine qui avoit été au maréchal de SaintAndré, la plus belle tapisserie du Cardinal, sur les desseins de Jules Romain, je l’entendis venir au bruit que faisoient ses pantoufles qu’il trainoit comme un homme fort languissant et qui sort d’une grande maladie. Je me cachai derrière la tapisserie et je l’entendis dire “Il faut quitter tout cela!” Il s’arrêtoit à chaque pas, car il étoit fort foible, et se tournoit tantôt d’un coté tantôt de l’autre, et jetant les yeux sur l’objet qui lui frappoit la vue, il disoit du profond du coeur: “Il faut quitter tout cela!? et se tournant, il achevoit: “Et encore cela! Que j’ai eu de peine à acquérir ces choses! Puis-je les abandonner sans regret? Je ne les verrai plus où je vais.” J’entendis ces paroles très distinctement. Elles me touchèrent peut-être plus qu’il n’en étoit touché lui-meme..... Je sis un grand soupir que je ne pus retenir et il m’entendit. “Qui est là? dit-il. Qui est là?
—C’est moi, Monseigneur, qui attendois le moment de parler à Votre Eminence d’une lettre de M. de Bordeaux, fort importante, que je viens de recevoir.—Approchez, approchez”, me dit-il d’un ton fort dolent. Il étoit nu dans sa robe de camelot, fourré de petit-gris et avoit son bonnet de nuit sur sa tête. Il me dit: “Donnez-moi la main; je suis bien foible, je n’en puis plus.—Votre Eminence feroit bien de s’asseoir.” Et je voulus lui porter une chaise. “Non, dit-il, non. Je suis bien aise de me promener es j’ai affaire dans ma bibliothèque.” Je lui présentai le bras et il s’appuya dessus. Il ne voulut point que je lui parlasse d’affaires. “Je ne suis plus, me dit-il, en état de les entendre.
Parlez-en au Roi et faites ce qu’il vous dira. J’ai bien d’autres choses maintenant dans la tête.” Et revenant à sa pensée: “Voyez-vous, mon ami, ce beau tableau du Cortège, et encore cette Vénus du Titien, et cet incomparable Déluge d’Antoine Carrache (car je sais que vous aimez les tableaux et vous vous y connoissez très bien). Ah! mon pauvre ami, il faut quitter tout cela! Adieu, chers tableaux que j’ai tant aimés et qui m’ont tant coûté!” '
‘Il faut quitter tout cela’—yet even from the grave Mazarin was able to promote the patronage of Italian art which had meant so much to him. In 1644 he had summoned to Paris a branch of the Theatine order, which settled on the banks of the Seine. In his will he left them a large sum with which to rebuild the church of St Anne-la-Royale and directed that his heart be buried in it. For this purpose the Theatines summoned a member of their own order, Guarino Guarini, who arrived in 1662. There he began work on the church which was interrupted in 1669 and only completed some fifty years later. With its curving façade, derived from Borromini’s S. Carlo aile Quattro Fontane, and highly idiosyncratic vault, the plan made no concession whatsoever to current
French practice and remained as a wholly isolated-example of Italian Baroque architecture in the Paris of the Grand Siècle.1 As such it may well have served more as a deterrent than as an inducement to further experiments of the same kind. For a reaction was already under way, though it was not yet apparent.
Both Fouquet, the unfortunate finance minister who was arrested as soon as Louis
XIV took over power, and Colbert, who replaced him, had been employed by Mazarin,

[Page 187]
and both were enthusiastic collectors of Italian art.1 For all his patriotic ambitions the young King found it absolutely natural to look to Italy for the painters, sculptors and architects whom he wished to employ. In Florence Baldassare Franceschini was commissioned to paint Fame carrying the Name os the King to the Temple of Immortality.2 In
Rome Ciro Ferri was also working for Louis XIV3 and Pier Francesco Mola was invited to come to Paris where he was offered an enormous stipend, but died as he was about to set off.4 Like other painters he had seen which way the wind was now blowing, and though the independent-minded Salvator Rosa refused an invitation to Paris in the same year (1665), he was soon writing that ‘there is not a Frenchman fond of art who comes here without trying to get hold of something by me’.5 But the culmination and crisis of this French enthusiasm are to be found in Louis XIV’s plans for the Louvre.
Soon after the onset of his rule Louis and Colbert began to consider proposals for building the eastern’front of the royal palace. Colbert was hostile to Le Vau, who had been Mazarin’s principal architect, but after searching for alternative French designers he was compelled to admit defeat and turn to Italy. As a first step he proposed submitting
Le Vau’s plans to some of the leading Roman architects, but he then went further and asked the Italians to send drawings of their own. The resulting tragicomedy has been examined in detail by many writers and only the outlines and significance of the story need be discussed here.6
Arrogant nationalism had become very powerful as a result of the unscrupulously patriotic policies of Richelieu and even, paradoxically, of Mazarin, but the French hostility to Italian art which now began to make itself felt was based on more than purely racial feeling. Criticisms of the plans submitted by Bernini, Pietro da Cortona,
Carlo Rainaldi and the unknown Candiani were precise and consistent: none of these architects had paid any serious attention to French conditions; all of them were too elaborate, too ‘Baroque1 for native taste. Pietro da Cortona’s drawing ‘avait plutôt l’idée d’un temple que d’un palais . . .’. Candiani’s were ‘extravagant’; Rainaldirs ‘fort bizarres et n’avaient aucun goût de la belle et simple architecture’. Modem opinion has endorsed most of these views. It was Bernini who came nearest to imposing his taste on Paris, and he did this mainly through the personal support of the King, but in the end he too was unsuccessful. His first plans were rejected, but he was then invited to submit further ones and to come to Paris himself to discuss the problem. After a triumphantprogress through the provinces he was introduced to Louis on 4 June 1665. His first words set the right tone: ‘J’ai vu. Sire, les palais des empereurs et des papes et ceux

[Page 188]
des princes souverains, qui se sont trouvés sur la route de Rome à Paris, mais il faut faire pour le Roi de France, un Roi d’aujourd’hui, de plus grandes et magnifiques choses que tout cela.... Qu’on ne me parle de rien qui soit petit.’ But Colbert couldhardly see the matter in the same light. He too was anxious for grandeur, but as a practical administrator he was just as concerned with expense and the detailed arrangement of rooms.
Bernini was nothelpful in this respect, and he failed to appreciate one essential difference between the French monarchy and the papacy to which he was accustomed: despite the age-old history of the institution itself, each new pope was determined to outshine his predecessor and start afresh; a French king, on the other hand, was always succeeding a father and a grandfather whom he revered and he felt no ambition to obliterate their memories. Louis tried to explain to Bernini ‘qu’il avait quelque affection de conserver ce qu’avaient fait ses prédécesseurs...’, but this made no impact on the Italian architect whose proposals were uncompromisingly new. Thus the bitter hatred which he aroused through his contempt for all things French could be crystallised into reasoned opposition.
There were factions at court; the King himself remained keen, but by October Bernini was on his way back to Rome and it was widely—and correctly—believed that his plans would not be executed.
During his stay in Paris Bernini had given one unchallengeable proof of his genius.
Within two or three weeks of his arrival he had been commissioned to make a marble bust of the King and here at last he found a subject worthy of his exalted visions of royalty (Plate 27b). Moreover this was his first opportunity to portray a secular prince from the life and he was thus able to seize upon those individual traits of character which he felt to be so important as well as build up an idealised, hieratic image of personal monarchy at its most supreme.1 The bust he made in 1665 remains the most compelling record of absolutism in the visual arts. Louis was sufficiently impressed to order an equestrian statue. Bernini began work on this four years after his return to
Rome, but it did not reach Paris until 1684, some time after his death.2 By now French self-satisfaction was at its peak. In military power, in literature and in every other sphere no country—or combination of countries—could rival her. Two years earlier the
‘Gallican’ principles had signified the King’s desire to establish a State religion as independent as possible from papal influences. No wonder that Bernini’s monument was found uncongenial. He had been asked to base it on his statue of Constantine in the
Vatican—now these echoes of ultramontane claims must have seemed jarring and tactless. And on purely aesthetic grounds a native taste had developed which found Italian floridity repugnant. Louis wanted to break up the statue. He then relented, but had it banished to the remotest corner of the grounds at Versailles. Soon Girardon made the necessary alterations and the figure was called Marcus Curtius.
Bernini’s failure in Paris is always said to mark the collapse of Italian artistic prestige in France. It is true that criticisms and hostility towards Italian art became increasingly powerful as the French grew more self-assured. It is also true that, with the full support

[Page 189]
os Bernini himself, Louis established in 1666 the French Academy in Rome with the declared purpose of enabling French artists to share with the Italians the privilege of studying the masterpieces of the past and thus eventually replacing them. And indeed
Italian participation in Versailles—the greatest architectural and decorative enterprise of Louis XIV’s reign—was negligible. None the less the habit of seeking artists in Italy died hard and certainly did not come to an immediate end. A Genoese landscape-painter
Francesco Borzone who had been summoned to Paris at the beginning of the new reign was generously employed by the King until 1679.1 A Roman sculptor of classicising tendencies, Domenico Guidi, was chosen by Louis ‘from all those not only in Italy but in the whole of Europe’ to make one of the sculptured groups for the gardens at Versailles—but it was to be based on drawings provided by Le Brun.2 When, after many difficulties, the monument, which represented Fame inscribing the glories of Louis XIV on the shoulders of Time, finally reached France it was used to replace Bernini’s equestrian statue. But even this Louis found ‘un peu riche de draperie’. Meanwhile Carlo Maratta had been commissioned to paint a large picture of Apollo and Daphne for which he was well paid and given the title ‘peintre du roi’.3 Some years later the director of the French
Academy in Rome was making enquiries as to whether the Bolognese artist Carlo
Cignani, who painted a couple of pictures for the King, might be prepared to go to Paris.
But the matter was not pressed as Cignani’s draughtsmanship was Considered too weak
—yet another instance of the divergencies between Italian painting and the more rigorous French taste.4
It would be perfectly possible to choose many other examples of Louis’ patronage of Italian artists, but here it must be pointed out how disappointingly little this was compared to their expectations. Again and again we come across instances of Italian painters looking—and often looking in vain—to Paris for support now that the Pope was no longer able to employ them. The hints that they dropped were broad enough.
Bellori’s Le Vite de’ Pittori . . . Moderni of 1672 was dedicated to Colbert, Malvasia’s
Felsina Pittrice (lives of the Bolognese artists) of 1678 to Louis XIV. The Bolognese, especially, were anxious to attract French attention. We are told that Carlo Cignani,
Benedetto Gennari, Luigi Quaini and Donato Creti were all keen admirers of Louis
XIV, and it is not being excessively cynical to suspect that such admiration was not wholly disinterested.6 Further south the situation was more complicated. Thus Mattia
Preti made an allegorical portrait of Louis XIV which he intended to present to him as a gift, but when hostilities broke out between France and Spain he realised that his situation in Malta made such gestures imprudent and sold the picture elsewhere.6
Spain however retained a welcome interest in Italian painters and their works.

[Page 190]
Throughout the second half of the century Neapolitan artists were frequently employed by the Viceroys, who were themselves often acting on behalf of the court or other important collectors in Madrid. Against this general background certain specific occasions stand out. In 1649 Velasquez embarked on his second visit to Italy.1 One of his duties was to acquire paintings and sculpture for the royal palace of the Alcazar, and in most of the towns he visited, but especially Venice, he looked at or bought pictures for this purpose. A living painter was also needed, and here Velasquez was not so successful.
He had been told to try and persuade Pietro da Cortona to come to Madrid, but when he reached Rome he found that the artist was too busily engaged by the Oratorians to be able to move. So on his way back he stopped at Modena and made overtures to the architectural painters Angelo Michele Colonna and Agostino Mitelli, but with them too he had no luck and he was thus forced to return with several old masters in his baggage but no artist capable of reviving the practice of fresco painting in Spain. His employment of sculptors was more satisfactory: Giuliano Finelli, Alessandro Algardi and other less distinguished men in Rome and Naples made copies after the antique and original works for the royal collection. And in the long run even his attempts to induce Colonna and Mitelli to come to Madrid bore fruit, for in 1658 both men finally arrived and were assiduously employed.
Among all the viceroys of the second half of the seventeenth century one man stands out far above the rest both for his political ability and for his distinction as an art patron—a combination of qualities that was by no means frequent as this study will have shown. Don Gasparo de Haro y Guzman, known in Italy as the Marchese del
Carpio, was appointed ambassador in Rome in 1677 at the age of 48? Hs youth had been stormy and at one time he was even imprisoned for two years on suspicion of being implicated in an attempt on the King’s life. Already he had shown a passionate love of painting and by 1651 he owned one of the masterpieces of his country’s art: Velasquez’s
Toilet of Venus (the ‘Rokeby’ Venus).3 This was also one of the most ‘Italian’ pictures ever painted by a Spaniard and Del Carpio must havewelcomed the opportunity to go to
Italy himself. Within three months of his arrival in Rome we find him visiting the picture gallery of Salvator Rosa’s friend Carlo de Rossi and spending more than an hour and a half there.4 Soon afterwards he was given a wonderful opportunity to add to his collections when Cardinal Camillo Massimi died full of debts and his heirs were
- - compelled to dispose of his property. Del Carpio bought on a grand scale. He obtained two portraits by Velasquez—of the Cardinal himself and of Donna Olimpia—and a very large number of antiquities which he planned to have engraved.5 Indeed he clearly

[Page 191]
felt an affinity between Massimi’s classical taste and his own, for he paid special attention to assembling thirty volumes of drawings by old masters and contemporaries, particularly Carlo Maratta who was his favourite artist.1
Del Carpio was also a great admirer of Bernini, who died during his term of office in Rome. He owned a small version of the Fountain of the Four Rivers in the Piazza
Navona and looked upon it as the finest piece in his collection2; on a visit to the sculptor’s studio, he was able to acquire one of his self-portrait drawings from his son
Domenico3; and in Naples there were rumours that he was offering 30,000 scudi for the ill-fated equestrian statue of Louis XIV.4 We can share his disappointment that this offer was not accepted.
The Ambassador’s enthusiasm for contemporary Roman painting is recorded in all the documents of the period. We are told that several times a week he would visit the studios of Niccolo Berrettoni, a pupil of Maratta, Giuseppe Ghezzi, later to be permanent secretary of the Accademia di S. Luca, and Giovanni Francesco Grimaldi, the landscape artist5; that he launched the career of the young painter Paolo de Matteis after finding him copying the altarpieces in St Peter’s6; and that when he went to Naples at the end of 1682 ‘the painters lost a great lover and protector of their art’. They did indeed, for there was no native Italian to show such discriminating enthusiasm.
In Naples Del Carpio continued his patronage and increased his collection of paintings from 1100 to 1800/ putting in charge of them an obscure Sienese painter,
Giuseppe Pinacci, who proved to be an expert restorer.8 The palace, hung with masterpieces and rich furnishings of all kinds, impressed even those who were familiar with viceregal luxury.9 Luca Giordano, whom he had already met in Rome, replaced Carlo
Maratta as his chief painter and decorated churches and the palace for him. When the
Viceroy died in 1687, it was said that ‘Naples had lost a loving father and her artists a great support’.10 Both parts of this judgement were true. For several years shiploads of picturesand antique statuary sailed out from Naples to enrich the collections of Del
Carpio’s descendants in Madrid.11 And the city which they left behind was no longer what it had been only four years earlier. For Del Carpio’s contribution to Neapolitan culture must be gauged not so much by the works he commissioned from local artists
’ 5 Pascoli, I, pp. 48 and 186, and II, p. 202.
’ 9 Pacichelli, Parte IV, Vol. I, p. 39.

[Page 192]
as by the enlightened reforms with which he uprooted a hideously corrupt administration. The misgovernment of rulers such as Monterey, followed by civil strife and terrible natural disasters, had led to a situation unparalleled in civilised Europe. Brigandage was openly encouraged by an irresponsible aristocracy. Justice was non-existent despite an abundance of lawyers. The inequalities between rich and poor were too glaring even for an age not unduly worried by social problems. Del Carpio’s brief administration made the first serious attempt to tackle these evils. In so doing he aroused bitter hostility from some sections of the nobility, but he also laid the foundations for a
‘new civilisation’ which was soon to lift Naples once again into the forefront of intellectual Europe.
When still in Rome Del Carpio had tried to persuade various painters, notably
Giacinto Calandrucci and Niccolo Berrettoni, to take employment under the King in
Madrid.1 It-was not, however, until 1692 that a considerable Italian artist left to work in
Spain although quantities of Italian pictures were reaching the Alcazar. In that year
Luca Giordano embarked on the voyage that was to keep him in Spain for nearly ten years. He was welcomed by the King with enthusiasm and a vast salary. In return he introduced into the many palaces and churches which he so beautifully decorated a type of painting in which the Spaniards themselves were deficient: colourful, exuberant, facile perhaps but composed with marvellous ability, making use of devices learned from all the Baroque masters, yet with a personal note of airiness and fantasy.2 From every point of view the visit must be looked upon as thé most fruitful paid by any Italian artist outside his native countryduring the seventeenth century. Luca Giordano’s brilliance rightly dazzled the Spaniards and led eventually to their employment of such master decorators as Corrado Giaquinto and Tiepolo; and his influence, though at the time it may have proved enfeebling for some already feeble local painters, was much later absorbed with profit by the young Goya. For Giordano himself the years in
Madrid were equally important. For, unlike Bernini in Paris a generation earlier, he was as ready to learn as he was to express himself. Already a keen admirer of Venetian art, he found in the royal palaces a collection of Titians unequalled in the world for quantity and quality and under their impact he dropped most of the remaining vestiges of his darker Neapolitan manner. He copied Rubens and he pleased his hosts through his sincere appreciation of Velasquez. When he returned to Italy he only had two years more to hve, but even during that time he proved himself to be, at the age of 70, the most
‘advanced’ painter of his day.

**Footnotes:**
1 Vaes, 1931, p. 202.
1 Colapietra, p. 30.
2 Capecelatro, p. 94.
3 Jean-Jacques Bouchard—Marcheix, p. 61.
4 J. Walker, p. 78.
5 Passeri, pp. 61 and 64, note 3.
6 ibid., p. 157; Trapier, p. 109. A series o£ ancient Roman scenes painted for the King of Spain is now in the Prado (Nos. 234-236), some of which are by Lanfranco.
172 PAINTERS Cathedral he too was at once taken up by the Viceroy, who commissioned life-size portraits of himself and his wife. He then used his influence with the Cathedral authorities to get Finelli a far larger share in the decoration than had originally been planned, though this met with the strongest opposition from the local sculptor Cosimo Fanzago.1 Monterey’s preference for the artists he had known in Rome did not, however, cause him to neglect the Neapolitan school. In particular he employed his compatriot Ribera on a number of altarpieces for his Augustinian church. But it is possible that the new Baroque composition and much lighter tonality of these pictures represented a concession by the artist to Monterey’s clearly demonstrated admiration for Roman and Venetian painting. Certainly he, like other painters in the city, owed much to this Viceroy’s patronage.2 And as the Neapolitans watched him depart in 1637 with his forty shiploads of booty they must have had mixed feelings. Even by the standards to which they were accustomed he was outstanding for the zeal and ingenuity with which he had drained his provinces of men and money to help the Spanish cause during the Thirty Years War. Yet his extravagance and greed had undoubtedly given the arts a remarkable stimulus—and there might well be worse to come.
1 Passeri, p. 251.
2 Trapier, p. 72.
3 Costello, p. 247.
4 Röthlisberger, 1961,1, pp. 15 5-60; Blunt, 1959, pp. 3 89-90.
1 Barozzi e Berchet, I, p. 242.
2 Crozet, p. 49.
3 Batiffol; Tapié, p. 67.
1 Baldinucci, IV, 1688, pp. 206-7; Desjardins, p. 49; Dhanens.
2 Desjardins, p. 50. The monument was destroyed in 1792. In 1559 Catherine de’ Medici had commissioned an equestrian statue of Henri ll from Michelangelo, but this was never executed. Tacca later made a similar monument for Philip III of Spain.
3 Batiffol, p. 430. 4 Sterling, pp. 112-20.
1 Baudson, pp. 28-33, and II Seicento Europeo, 1956, p. 64.
2 Bonnaffe, p. 269.
1 Mazarin, 1961. 2 Correspondance, p. 15.
3 ibid., p. 31, note 2. 4 ibid., pp. 36 and 37; Brigand, 1962, p. 142.
5 Malvasia, II, p. 264. 6 Blunt, 1954, p. 89.
7 Wittkower, 1955, p. 202. 8 Poussin: Correspondance, p. 188.
9 Passeri, p. 11$.
1 Baldinucci, 1948, p. 92.
2 Stone, p. 92, and also Betcherman, pp. 325-31.
3 Luzio, pp. 63-167.
4 Lumbroso, p. 369, and in 1645 Gabriele Balestrieri wrote to the Duke of Modena that ‘gli Inglesi...
5 Albion, passim.
1 Malvasia, II, p. 261, and Mahon, 1949, p. 222, who suggests that there was no link between the Semiramis and Charles I’s invitation.
2 Walpole, 1762, II, p. 51. Though this cannot be accepted as reliable evidence there is no reason to doubt its substantial truth.
3 Baldinucci, V, 1702, p. 361.
4 Crinò, p. 203; Hess, 1952, pp. 159-87.
6 Orazio’s daughter, the painter Artemisia Gentileschi, also came to England for a year or two in about 1638.
8 Pope-Hennessy, 1953, pp. 157-62; Whinney and Millar, pp. 121-2.
2 ibid., with bibliography.
3 Hervey, p. 391.
4 Passeri, p. 191.
5 Albion, p. 395.
6 Guido Reni, p. 109.
1 Prunidres, 1913, p. 41.
2 Brienne, I, p. 315.
3 It is most unlikely that Mazarin could have commissioned anything serious before 1632, the date that Mahon (i960, pp. 352-4) has suggested for his purchase of the two Poussins.
4 In the Louvre and Institute of Arts, Detroit—see Nicolas Poussin, pp. 46 and 65.
1 In fact Brienne says (I, p. 302) that Mazarin did not own a single Poussin, but he almost certainly meant one of the artist’s later works which were far better known in France than his early pictures.
2 Brienne, I, pp. 293-4.
3 Mazarin, p. xxxiii.
4 Letter from Romanelli to Francesco Barberini of 6 July 1646—Pollak, 1913, p. 52.
1 Prunieres, 1913, p. 68; Bjurstrom, 1961.
2 Felibien, III, p. 530.
3 Malvasia, II, p. 264.
4 ibid., II, p. 327.
8 Rothlisberger, 1961,1, p. 274, who points out that although Claude recorded the purchaser of this picture (now in Dresden) as the otherwise unknown ‘M. Parasson’, it belonged to Mazarin by 1653 and was most likely painted for him through an agent.
1 Passeri, p. 210.
2 Mazarin bought the palace from the Lante family which had acquired it from the Bentivoglio.
3 In 1646—see avviso published in Roma, 19 3 8, p. 477. See also Elpidio Benedetti, p. 5, Mazarin: Epistolario inedito, p. 119 (letter of 3 June 1650 to Maccarani: ‘mi piace riesca di Sua soddisfatione, perchè non può essere, se non bella . ..’), and Mazarin: Lettres pendant son ministère, IX, p. 693 fletter osò March 1661 to Maccarani). The inscription on the façade reads: anno giubilei mdcl iulius s.r.e.d. card, mazarinus a FUNDAMEN. EREXIT. Besides being Mazarin’s agent, Maccarani was a collector in his own right. In 1675 he owned ‘une galerie de statues et de tableaux’—Span et Wheler, I, p. 236.
4 Prunières, 1913, p. 149.
5 Baldinucci, VI, 1728. p. 245.
8 Pascoli, I, p. 47.
1 de Còrnac, p. 144, and Taylor, p, 332.
2 d’Aumale, pp. 293 ff. -
3 See the inventory of 1661 in de Cosnac, item 1240. Incidentally, among those who drew up this inventory was the Genoese painter and engraver Giovanni Andrea Podesta whose connection with Mazarin has not hitherto been noticed—see Blunt in Revue des Arts, 1958.
4 Bonnaffé, pp. 168-70, and Briganti, 1962, p. 230. Guercino’s Cato is now at Marseilles—Hoog, pp. 270 ff.
1 de Cosnac, pp. 169 ff. 2 Hautecoeur, pp. 39-49.
3 ibid., pp. 84-9. 4 Alazard, pp. 18-28 and 55-86.
5 Brienne, IH, pp. 88-90.
1 Wittkower, 1958, p. 269.
1 Alazard, passim, and Bonnaffé, pp. 68-9 and 113-15. —
2 Alazard, p. no.
3 RufFo, p. 298.
4 Pascoli, I, p. 127. Canini, who accompanied Cardinal Chigi on his visit to Paris in 1664, was also employed at the French court—Pascoli, II, p. 124.
5 Limentani, 1950, p. 21, and De Rinaldis, 1939, p. 193. Louis XIV’s attitude to Rosa was later to change, for in 1697 a Battle by the artist which had been presented to him by the Papal Nunzio was sent to Paris from Versailles with the following note: ‘tableau dont le roi ne veut point’—Bailly, p. 50.
6 For this section see, apart from Blunt, 1953, and Wittkower, 1938, Hautecœur and Chantelou.
1 Wittkower, 1955, pp. 230-1, with bibliography.
2 ibid., pp. 234-6.
1 Soprani, I, p. 254. 2 Pascoli, I, p. 255, and Wittkower, 1938.
3 Montaiglon, I, p. 104, and Bellori, 1942, pp. 101 and 126.
4 Zanotti, I, p. 245, and Montaiglon, I, p. 190. In 1685 the director of the French Academy in Rome tried to persuade Luca Giordano to paint a picture for the King, but the artist defaulted on his obligations— Alazard, p. 142.
6 Zanotti, I, pp. 155, 170, 199, and II, p. 121.
6 De Dominici, IV, p. 50.
1 Harris, in Archivo Español, i960, pp. 109-36, and 1961, pp. 101-105 (for Colonna and Mitelli).
2 For the fullest account of his politics! career see Ghelli.
3 Maclaren, p. 76. 4 Avviso of 12 June 1677 published in Roma, XIX, 1941, p. 308.
5 Harris, 1957, pp. 136-9. For his antiques see the album, belonging to the Society of Antiquaries, of which the frontispiece is inscribed as follows: ‘DISEGNI d'Idoli, Statue, Filosofi, Busti, Urne piccole, Bassi Rilievi, Medaglie, Inscrittioni, Vasi di Marmi, e Porfidi, Fontane di Marmi, Alabastri, e Metalli antichi, e moderni; Quali Comprò in Roma l'Ecc. mo Signore Don Gasparo d’Haro e Guzman, Marchese del Carpio è Helicce. I am most grateful to Enriqueta Harris for this and much further information about del Carpio’s collection.
1 Bellori, 1942, pp. 117 and 121.
2 See the introduction to the Society of Antiquaries’ album and Pacichelli, Parte IV, Vol. I, p. 39.
3 Domenico Bernino, p. 28.
4 Letter from Duc d’Estrées to Louis XIV, dated 27 July 1684, in Montaiglon, VI, p. 388.
6 De Dominici, IV, p. 315. „
7 See Discursos leídos ame la Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando en la recepción pública del Exento Sr. Duque de Berwick y de Alba, Madrid 1924, p. 20.
8 Bottari, Et, p. 105, and Orlandi, p. 236.
10 De Dominici, IV, p. 164. For Del Carpio’s Neapolitan drawings see Saxl, p. 76.
11 See Listas de cuadros y objetos artísticos remitidos desde Italia a España por el puerto da Nápoles en los años 1683 a 1687—MS. El Escorial &-IV-25 (photocopy in Warburg Institute).
1 Pascoíi, I, p. 186, and II, p. 314.
2 Griseri, 1956, pp. 33-9, and Longhi, 1954, pp. 28-39. Zanotti (I, pp. 247-8) says that Luca Giordano’s invitation followed a refusal by Marcantonio Franceschini to go to Spain.