# 08 CHP-8 sec ii

The patrons hitherto considered, though living outside Rome, where artists from all over Italy and indeed Europe had congregated, were able in their own collections to reflect some of the variety which had been the most attractive and influential feature of Roman patronage. But all of them, with the exception of Don Antonio Russo, lived in centres of great artistic traditions and achievement characterised by flourishing local schools of painting. In most cases it was these local artists who provided the backbone of their collections which were then reinforced with additions from elsewhere, usually
Naples. The difficulties facing a collector living in a city with no such tradition or local school on which to fall back were more complex and led to more interesting results.
For in these cities the patron had to commission works of art almost exclusively from outside his province, and this involved a freedom of choice that did not face collectors in Bologna, Genoa or Naples. Thus it came about that some of the most interesting collections of Italian art in the later seventeenth or early eighteenth centuries were to be found in cities quite undistinguished for their native painters. It was in places like
Bergamo, Ferrara, Macerata and Lucca, far more even than in Rome, that the enterprising traveller of the time might have found hanging together pictures by the younger painters from all over Italy—those men such as Crespi, Solimena, Sebastiano Ricci and others who had declined to visit or to remain in Rome. Indeed, the most striking
De Dominici, IV, p. 188. -
42, 51 and 89. Early in the nineteenth century the French traveller Valéry (I, p. 342) said that the Palazzo
Contarini contained ‘quatre des meilleurs tableaux de Luc Giordano, parmi lesquels l’Enée emportant son père Anchise.’ For Neapolitan artists in Rome see Mattia Loret.

[Page 215]
aspect of these collections lies in their neglect of Roman painting. The classicising doctrines and institutions that paralysed or boycotted so many of those painters who actually went to Rome were not to be found in these out-of-the-way places, and a taste could thus growup in them based on very different canons of appreciation. It is true that these collections were probably not many—though they obviously must have been far more than the few that are here recorded—but in at least one case they were highly influential. Moreover, the history of their development shows us the mechanism of an unusual type of patronage which is of great intrinsic interest and of some importance in the demolition of Roman values.
Work on the church of Santa Maria Maggiore in Bergamo began in 1137, and continued fitfully over the next few centuries.1 In 1355 Giovanni da Campione erected the delicate but richly ornamented Gothic portico supported on two stone lions which faces the Palazzo della Ragione, and a few years later he also built the rather more restrained entrance to the south. The Renaissance brought further additions to this essentially Romanesque structure. In 1425, after nearly three centuries, the campanile was completed, and towards the end of the century a sacristy in the new Bramantesque style made it still harder to appreciate the original plan. The successive modifications of the interior were far more drastic. Traces of Gothic frescoes still remain, but from the middle of the sixteenth century the whole decoration was changed. Altar paintings by local and Venetian artists began to appear, and rich and heavy stucco ornamentation crept over the interior of the dome which was planned by the Milanese architect
Francesco Maria Ricchini in 1612. Two years later the Bcrgamasque painter Giampaolo
Cavagna, helped by two other local artists, completed the decoration of the dome with frescoes of angels and prophets.
Thus by the middle of the seventeenth century the interior must already have presented a confusing spectacle with the spasmodic and incomplete decoration of several very different periods competing for attention. It was in 1653 that the Consiglio del
Consorzio, the governors of the church, decided to embark on an extensive programme of decoration, whose main purpose was to provide pictures for the central crossing of the church. A committee was appointed ‘to order oil paintings in the manner that should seem most suitable to their considered judgement’.2
The task was a vast one, and the problems that faced the committee were difficult.
- It was clear that there were no longer any Bergamasque artists of the calibre required and that the commission would have to be given to a foreigner. Bergamo had been ruled by Venice since 1430, but it lies only thirty miles from Milan. Its artistic culture reflected those of the two cities with which it was so closely associated and it was natural enough that the committee should once again look to them. Their relative failure led to a complicated series of negotiations in towns all over Italy, and though

[Page 216]
these led to no real masterpieces and few pictures of any great value they give the historian an enthralling impression of the difficulties that faced a persistent patron in a small town.
Their first choice fell on a Swiss artist, Cristoforo Storer, a pupil of the Milanese
Ercole Proccaccini, who had already had close contacts with leading families in Bergamo.
In February 1654 he was commissioned to paint one of the thirteen pictures to be embedded in the stucco of the vault and lunettes above the cornice of the southern transept. The subject given was The Levites, and though the picture was eventually produced, the artist’s dilatoriness caused the first of the many long delays which the committee had to suffer, so that by April 1655 they were considering changing their original scheme and having the vault frescoed as a quicker alternative. Indeed a few months later they sent two of their members to die country house of a local aristocrat to look at some frescoes he had had painted there and to decide whether or not the artist concerned would prove suitable for the church. However, they soon returned to the original plan, and in 1656 they commissioned a Neapolitan painter, Pietro Magni, who was then working for the Marquis of Mantua, to produce one picture for the site as an experiment, with the possibility, should it prove satisfactory, of being given the whole job. Evidently it did not—for when in January 1657 a Cremonese painter, Ottavio
Cocchi, offered on his own initiative to paint one of the pictures, his proposal was accepted and he was subsequently asked to paint four more. It was clear that the commission was an attractive one to comparatively minor artists.
Meanwhile in the same year the cominittee began looking around for a suitable painter for one of the three very large canvases to be placed above the main doors of the church. After a unanimous vote it was decided that the task should be given to
Guercino and a messenger was sent to him in Bologna. The subject chosen was The
Story of Esther, but a few months later this was changed to the Marriage at Cana. Guercino, however, was already overwhelmed with commissions and this one seems to have made no appeal to him. - .
The committee’s one attempt to move outside the limited range of local talent and employ an artist of international fame had thus met with no success. They put as good a face on this as they could and ‘tó the full satisfaction not just of the Magnifico Consiglio del Consorzio but of the whole city’ they commissioned a Massacre of the Innocents, to be placed in the right wall of the southern transept, from a Capuchin pupil of the
Veronese Brusasorci, Padre Massimo, a man who had already painted a number of altar pictures in the Veneto. So pleased were they with the work—a vigorous and efficient rehash of Paolo Veronese—that, with the promise-of lavish alms, they implored the
Capuchins to give temporary leave to Padre Massimo and allow him to settle in
Bergamo to paint further pictures. But this too came to nothing. Instead, other artists from Milan and its surroundings were commissioned to paint The Killing of Sisera, The
Sacrifice of Isaac, facob’s Ladder and the Murder of Cain. By 1659 the first stage in the decoration was complete.
The committee now turned to the vault of the northern transept, where thirteen

[Page 33]
a. Soumena: Dido and Aeneas
b. The gallery of the Palazzo Buonaccorsi, Macerata

[Page 34]
SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY COLLECTIONS {see Plates 34 and 35)
Velasquez: Juan de Pareja

[Page 3]
a. Rembrandt: Aristotle contemplating the Bust of Homer

[Page 36]
)04-63 setalP ees(
EG
AN
ORT
AP
SIH
DNA
DN
ANI
DREF
EC
NIRP
DNARG teliot reh ta lriG
:
ipser
C.M.G.b dnanidreF ecnirP dnarG
:iccurte
PocsecnarF
..

[Page 217]
paintings were required to correspond to those in the south, as well as one on the inner wall and two huge ones to be placed above the main North and South doors, in view of
Guercino’s reluctance to comply with their request. Whereas in the first stage of the decoration they had looked primarily to Milan for artists they now turned instead to their other traditional source—Venice. In 1660 a contract was signed with Pietro Liberi, at that time the best known artist in the city and already a man with a European reputation. Liberi agreed to paint the entire sixteen pictures for 3 800 ducats and was paid the first 500 as an advance guarantee. It must have seemed that Santa Maria Maggiore was at last able to attract a considerable painter. Seven-months later, his first canvas—The
Flood—arrived in Bergamo. But the committee did not like it. A cold letter was sent off to Liberi, complaining ‘that it does not satisfy us and in no way corresponds to the promises that you made us, still less to what we expected. And so we require you to re-do it in a praiseworthy manner that satisfies us—meanwhile you must stop work on the other pictures which we commissioned and which you agreed to undertake, just as we will stop the payments in conformity with the contract.’ It was a year before Liberi arrived in Bergamo, and after he had repainted the picture as demanded, it was placed above the South door, where it still is. He then returned to Venice to carry on with the commission. This time he was more cautious and instead of completing the second picture, The Last Judgement,he sent a sketch. This too was a total failure. The committee found it ‘deficient in every respect’, and thereafter the contract with Liberi was cancelled.
It is impossible, unfortunately, to know the reasons why Liberi’s canvases met with such a hostile reception. It is perfectly true that he was a bad painter, but then so were many of the other artists employed in S. Maria Maggiore who were none the less greeted ‘with complete satisfaction’. It is more likely that there was some precise cause.
His free style must have seemed slipshod in the provinces—but stylistic problems of this kind only very rarely troubled seventeenth-century clerical patrons, and in any case the tone of their letter suggests some much greater offence. In fact it seems most probable that Pietro Liberi, who was notorious for the extreme indecency of his highly erotic nudes, had upset Bergamasque susceptibilities, unused as they were to the more sophisticated tastes of Venice. No two subjects could have provided him with more welcome opportunities than The Flood and The Last Judgement, and (from what we see of the former even after the alterations) we can be sure that Liberi took full advantage of them?'
With the failure of their attempts in Venice the committee were now compelled to turn elsewhere. Ciro Ferri, the artist whom they chose to replace Pietro Liberi, was the most faithful follower of Pietro da Cortona and was at this time in Florence completing his master’s frescoes in the Palazzo Pitti.1 He was asked to come at once to
Bergamo ‘to see where the pictures were to be painted, be given the measurements and the subjects, and arrange the price’. He replied that he was unable to leave Florence for the moment, but asked for all the necessary details to be sent to him so that he could at

[Page 218]
once begin work on the sketches which he would then submit -for the committee’s approval. This was agreed and after some months of delay, during which the relations between artist and patrons rather cooled, Ciro Ferri finally arrived in Bergamo in
September 1665, and in December signed a contract to paint the sixteen pictures—partly - in oil and partly in fresco. Everything at last seemed satisfactory. In private letters Ferri wrote of his pleasure, though he admitted that the sites for the frescoes were rather too small. On the other hand the large picture over the door was to represent the Crossing of the Red Sea and this ‘is the grandest composition that I have ever done. On one side
I am painting the Hebrews who have already crossed and Moses raising his rod above the sea.’ The whole task, wrote Ferri, would take some two and a half years. In fact, he worked much quicker than he had expected. By May 1666 he had completed four of the frescoes; and by November a further six—all of subjects taken from the Old Testament. But now the first signs of trouble became apparent: T ana working day and night to get through quickly; for I’m so bored that I can’t stay any longer in this place.’ By
June 1667, however, eighteen months after his arrival, the business was nearly over. The thirteen frescoed compartments were all complete—little more than mannered and insipid variations on Pietro’s style—so was one of the large oil paintings, and he was waiting to finish the other so that they could both be shown to the public together.
In September the storm broke. Once again the committee showed how rigorous was their taste. They had doubts about the quality of the picture to be placed above the side door adjoining the Colleoni chapel and they decided to consult expert opinion as to its merits. Ciro Ferri, in a fit of rage at this insult, left Bergamo without completing his contract.
Three pictures remained to be painted—two large ones for the North and West doors and one, slightly smaller, for the inner wall of the North transept. The committee were once again, in a dilemma as to whom to choose for them. Various artists proposed themselves, and eventually the young Venetian, Antonio Zanchi, was accepted and required to paint Moses striking the RockJ By now the committee were in a much more wary frame of mind than they had been when engaging Ciro Ferri. Zanchi was to get no payment for submitting his drawings; even if they were approved and if the picture itself—which was to be painted in Bergamo—then turned out to be unsatisfactory it would be returned to him without fee. If it was accepted, experts would decide on the price. These terms were exceptionally hard and quite unlike those laid down in a normal contract. Zanchi, however, was still young and only at the outset of his extremely successful career. He agreed to everything, but on a visit to Bergamo to inspect the site he asked, and was given, permission to paint the picture in Venice. There the canvas was sent to him, followed by letters complaining of the delay and asking him to hurry. In fact, it was completed within four months, and it took the cautious committee almost as long again to make up their minds about it. Eventually it was accepted with obvious enthusiasm, for Zanchi was paid the considerable fee of 825 ducats, which he well deserved in view of the oustanding merits of this dramatic and richly

[Page 219]
coloured picture in which the blues, reds and greens of the women’s costumes and the muscular backs of the men romantically emerge from a tumultuous background.
For the picture of the Sacrifice of Noah to replace Ciro Ferri’s unsuccessful effort above the door of the Colleoni chapel the committee decided in 1677, after a delay of some years, to organise a competition. Three artists took part and submitted sketches:
Federico Cervelli of Milan, Pietro Negri of Venice, who had followed Zanchi in painting for the Scuola di San Rocco a picture to commemorate the cessation of the plague of 1630, and the Turinese Cavaliere Perugino, a protege of the King of Savoy.
This was won by Cervelli, who, after a visit to Bergamo to make certain alterations, was paid 370 ducats.
The third of the large oil paintings—The Crossing of the Red Sea,1 the subject that had so fascinated Ciro Ferri at the outset of his Bcrgamasque career—was entrusted in
1682 to the most distinguished painter that the committee were able to employ on their ambitious venture—Luca Giordano. The artist was then at the height of his career in
Naples, and the picture which he sent them, with its warm glow of light bathing the faithful who have just emerged from the dark-green tempestuous sea, justified their great hopes. He was given a present of 100 setidi in addition to the 700 he had already been promised, and was pressed, unsuccessfully, to undertake all the remaining decoration of the church.
Fourteen more paintings were now required for the central nave and the usual difficult negotiations were soon under way. In 1681 a painter from Como, Cristoforo
Tencala, was approached, but nothing was arranged. A year later a local artist Carlo
Ceresa submitted a tnodello, which was considered to be ‘very beautiful and precious’— flattering words designed to conceal the fact that the committee had now set their target much higher. Unfortunately their funds were unable to stand the strain. Carlo Cignani of Bologna, at this time probably the most famous painter in Italy, asked for exorbitant sums as well as all his expenses. He was obviously anxious to be given the commission, for he arrived in Bergamo to press his claims. The committee were sorely tempted, wavered, and suggested a compromise. But Cignani stuck to his position, and the plan fell through. Luca Giordano, whose Crossing of the Red Sea had been such a success, presented difficulties of much the same kind. He had first asked for 6000 ducats to paint the ten frescoes and four oils, but under pressure agreed to reduce this to 5000, provided that he himself, an assistant and a servant were given free board and lodging for as long as they "should be required to stay in Bergamo.2 The committee could just manage these conditions and a contract was signed—only to be ignored by the artist. One of the attractions of asking Giordano in the first place was his legendary speed. Now as year followed year, and letter after letter was met with conciliatory but evasive replies,
Giordano’s.success with all the courts of Italy and Europe was seen to be a real drawback.
Moreover, as time went by, his terms became stiffer and stiffer. Perhaps Cignani would

[Page 220]
prove more satisfactory after all. And so in 1692, when Giordano finally went to Spain, ten years after their original approach, the committee turned to Cignani once again.
Much had happened in the meantime. He was now painting the cupola of Forlì
Cathedral, a work which he intended should rival Correggio’s at Parma. His preoccupation with vast expanses made him reluctant to engage on a reduced space, the limitations of which had already disconcerted Ciro Ferri a quarter of a century earlier.
The smallness of the area available and the height of the bays would, he wrote in August
1692, make it impossible for him to paint the figures on such a scale that they would appear natural when seen from below in view of the crowded scenes he had been required to depict. ‘Above all, I find myself unable to undertake the work because the pictures are to hang above a perpendicular wall and this means that the foreshortening would have to be so excessive—especially in view of the not very wide expanse of the church—that it would be impossible to correct the distorted effect.’
So the problem remained unsolved. In Rome meanwhile the Swiss painter Ludovico David heard ‘from a colleague and friend of mine’ about the fourteen pictures that were needed.1 Anxious to prove himself in ‘such a notable site’, he wrote giving details of his career and offered to paint all the pictures within two and a half years at a price of 3500 scudi—or alternatively to take a share of the scheme at a price to be agreed with other artists. The committee, whose experiences over the last half-century had understandably made them cautious, proposed instead that painters all over Italy should paint three pictures each, entirely at their own expense, and that if these proved unsatisfactory no payment at all would be made. David was indignant. Hitherto he had always been paid at least a quarter of the agreed price in advance and the remainder immediately on completion of the work. T could not without shaming myself allow it to be remembered by posterity that I had degraded my noble profession in this way.’ He proposed instead a highly elaborate scheme: three of the subjects required should be chosen and a price of 500 scudi offered for each. Then any two other painters and David himself—after being paid a quarter in advance—should begin work and agree to complete the picture within a year. At the end of this time they should submit their canvases to a public exhibition in Rome so that each could see his rival’s work and the public could make criticisms. The canvases should then be sent to painters’ guilds in Florence,
Bologna and Venice ‘which are thought to be the best in Italy after Rome, which in this case must be excluded because of the risk of favouritism’. The artist who was considered the best should then be given the remainder of the commission.
All this was much too complicated for the committee, which applied instead to a
Bolognese pupil of Cignani, Marcantonio Franceschini. His terms were, however, even more expensive than his master’s or Luca Giordano’s had been, and though on hearing of a potential rival he hurriedly brought them down, the committee had already turned elsewhere.
To Naples, in fact—where a pupil of Luca Giordano, Niccolò Melanconici agreed to paint an Abraham at his own expense as an experiment. The picture arrived quickly

[Page 221]
and met with approval. It was arranged that Melanconici should be given the entire commission for a fee of 4000 ducats, which was to include all his expenses for travel and for board and lodging. The oils were painted in Naples, and then in June 1693 the artist himself arrived in Bergamo to undertake the frescoes. The results were controversial, but criticism, as the committee pointed out, ‘is unavoidable’. In any case a willing artist working for a reasonable fee was too rare to be turned down, and Melanconici was given a certain number of other pictures to paint in the church and allowed to append a gigantic signature, easily visible to the naked eye, beneath the colourful, if slightly academic, figure of David with the Head of Goliath. And so by 1695, some forty years after the original proposals, the decoration was at last complete.1
The long-drawn-out and complicated manœuvres of the Governors of S. Maria
Maggiore in Bergamo to commission artists from all the schools of Italy for the decoration of their church form by far the most ambitious (and the best documented) of such ventures in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. No private patron had either the resources or the available time to compete with this body. Yet in other small towns there were men who were helping, on however modest a scale, to break the cultural isolation of the Italian provinces. One such was Cardinal Tommaso Russo. He was bom in Naples in 1663 of the same great southern family which had given birth to Don
Antonio in Messina.2 He entered the Church and in 1692 was made Vice-Legate in
Ravenna by Pope Innocent XII. He then served as Inquisitor in Malta and Nunzio in
Tuscany before becoming maestro de camera to the Pope. He was made Cardinal in 1706, after which he returned to Ravenna as Legate for a short time before going to Ferrara, with which his connection was particularly close. He remained there from 1710 as
Legate and from 1717 as Archbishop until 1738, except for six years in Bologna from
1721 to 1727. As an old man he then lived in Rome in a palace opposite the Trevi
Fountain which he bought from the Cibo family. He died there, aged 90, in 1753.
Even this brief outline of his career will show that Ruffo had plenty of opportunities for seeking works by most of the leading Italian artists with the notable exception of those in Venice. And the very varied contents of his gallery testify to the width of his tastes as well as to his enthusiasm. It was in Ferrara that he brought the collection together, though we know that he would commission paintings in most of the towns in which he resided.
The gallery was kept in the new Archbishop’s Palace which was built for him in
1710'by the Roman architect Tommaso Mattei. In the centre of this vast palace adjoining the Cathedral a white stone stairway leads up to the' piano nobile in two great flights of steps which bend back on each other. At the halfway mark on the balustrade stands a statue of Vigilance commissioned by Ruffo from the sculptor Andrea Ferrerio,

[Page 222]
a pupil os the Bolognese Giuseppe Mazza.1 The same artist designed the rich stucco decoration of the staircase wall in" which were placed medallions of the six popes who had in some way benefited the City of Ferrara or her Legate, culminating in Innocent
XII, Russo’s own patron. On the top floor was another medallion in full relief of the reigning Pope, Clement XL On the ceiling of the staircase another Bolognese artist
Vittorio Bigari, known primarily for his later architectural fantasies, painted a fresco of the Catholic Religion, represented by the Papacy, presiding over the provinces of
Ravenna, Bologna and Ferrara shown symbolically in heroic dress—the three cities where Russo had principally served. It was in this grandiose setting, carefully designed by the Cardinal in collaboration with his architect and sculptor, that Russo kept a collection of paintings which aroused the enthusiasm of his contemporaries and which to us in retrospect still seems remarkably varied and impressive.
Russo owned a number of works attributed to the great Italianjmasters of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries—Giorgione, Titian, Bassano, Correggio, Raphael,
Parmigianino, Caravaggio, the Carracci, Guido Reni and Guercino as well as others by Rubens and Van Dyck less familiar in Italian collections.2 John Breval on a visit to
Ferrara commented on some of these—‘four of the most capital Castigliones I remember to have seen; an incomparable Lucretia by Hannibal Carache; and a very fine Original of the famous Neapolitan Chief of the Mutineers, Masanella [sir]’.3 But the most remarkable of all Russo’s seventeenth-century pictures must have been Velasquez’s portrait of his servant Juan de Pareja, ‘cosa stupenda’, which in 1704 he sent to an exhibition in Rome (Plate 34).
The bulk of his modern pictures came from Bologna. Crespi was represented by four works, two of which were commissioned during Russo’s legateship in the city:
Abigail giving Presenti to David and The Finding of Moses.5 Both these religious themes are treated in a spirit of subdued and tender romanticism, and it was perhaps this quality that Russo sound so congenial in Crespi’s more aristocratic counterpart in the depiction of such subjects—Donato Creti. He was so fond of this painter that he used to sit
The picture ‘11 Ritratto da tre palmi rappresentante un servo che Ri serv.re del S.r Diego Velasquez famoso pitt.re e cosa stupenda’ was among those lent to the exhibition in S. Salvatore in Lauro in 1704
—see p. 125, note 1. It is the picture now in the Metropolitan Museum which was in the collection of Sir
William Hamilton in Naples by 1798.

[Page 223]
watching him at work for hours and had him created Cavaliere dello speron d'oro.1
He owned at least two paintings by him of scenes from the life of Solomon and a Dance of Nymphs described by the artist’s biographer as a capriccio pittoresco with twenty-four figures. Russo commissioned religious paintings and histories by most of the other leading Bolognese artists such as Carlo Cignani, Marcantonio Franceschini (after 1720) and Giovan Gioseffo dal Sole and also two bambocciate by Giuseppe Gambarini.2
Despite a life spent almost entirely in the North, Ruffo remained closely attached to his Neapolitan background. Luca Giordano sent him four pictures, of which one, representing Hebrew Women singing after crossing the Red Sea, may well have been connected with his work for S. Maria Maggiore in Bergamo; Solimena painted for him a
Nativity and a Presentation; and when he retired to Rome it was once again to his compatriots that he turned. The rich chapel which Nicola Salvi built for him in S.
Lorenzo in Damaso was decorated by Sebastiano Cbnca and Corrado Giaquinto, the former of whom also painted other pictures for him.3 Roman artists he found to be of little interest and his gallery in the Palazzo Cibo must have retained its exotic and delicate flavour until his death.
Another patron who during these years was ranging freely over Italy for his pictures was Raimondo Buonaccorsi, who lived in the little Marchigian town of
Macerata. This provincial nobleman was born in 1669 of an old and important family with extensive ramifications throughout the peninsula and a particularly close relationship with the Church? In 1699 he married Francesca Bussi, who by 1726 had brought eighteen children into the world, one of whom, Simone, was to become a Cardinal.
He died in 1743. Of his personality and achievements we know next to nothing. The less than a handful of letters to and from him that can be traced suggest almost too characteristic an image of the early eighteenth-century gentleman as transmitted to us by subsequent writers—elaborately courteous, proud, and deeply attached to the established powers. But also-ambitious with more than a touch of arrogance? Until further evidence comes to light we must be content with this shadowy sketch: meanwhile we can see from the splendid decoration of his palace that he was also a patron of great enterprise and interest. The palace—the finest in this little hill town in the
- 2 Zanotti, I, p. 239.
s The letters, which are oflittle interest, are in the Vatican Library—(i) From Raimondo Buonaccorsi to Tiberio Cenci, dated 23 February 1705—Vat. , c. 39; (ii) from Alessandro Borgia, Arcivescovo e principe di Fermo, to Raimondo Buonaccorsi, dated 13 September 1737—Borg. , c. 87; (iii) as (ii)—dated 7 December 1742, Borg. , c. 125.

[Page 224]
States of the Church—was being built for Raimondo during the first two decades of the eighteenth century on the site of an earlier one which had been acquired in 1701 by his father.1 The architect was the Roman Giovanni Battista Contini, and although work continued for many years, by 1707 enough progress had been made for Raimondo
Buonaccorsi to begin the decoration of the long gallery. This survives intact today (Plate 33b). The low barrel-vault is covered from end to end with a single fresco and this alone gives some unity to the very varied decorative scheme that faces the visitor.
On each side of the gallery three windows open on to a courtyard and on to the front of the palace, and the fight which streams in reveals the general richness—a profusion of coloured marbles with elaborate wood and stucco ornamentation. Overriding everything are the paintings. The whole surface is covered with huge square and rectangular canvases which fit into all the wall space available between and above the doors and windows. Each one is painted in a wholly different style: we find the blond, carefully drawn figures of a Bolognese next to the darkly dramatic and rich swirling movement of a Neapolitan or the confusion of a late Venetian. Yet it soon becomes clear that each represents an episode taken from a single story—the Aeneid. It is such iconographie unity combined with extreme stylistic diversity, rather than any intrinsic merit in the canvases, which makes this decoration so exceptional in the Italy of its day.
In 1707 Raimondo Buonaccorsi summoned two Bolognese artists. Carlo Antonio
Rambaldi and Antonio Dardani, to paint the fresco of the Apotheosis of Aeneas on the vault of his gallery,2 and soon afterwards he began to commission the pictures of single episodes from the epic to be fitted into the walls. Rome, capital of the papal states in which he lived, was the obvious place to which to turn, but for him, as for so many of the livelier provincial patrons, Roman painting seems to have had little appeal and he chose only one example for his gallery: a picture of Venus in the Forge of Vulcan, painted apparently by Luigi Garzi.3 For the rest his attention was firmly concentrated on
Naples, Bologna and Venice.
The masterpiece of the whole series, Francesco Solimena’s Dido welcoming Aeneas to the Royal Hunt, was among the first to arrive (Plate 33a).4 The tremendous implications of the theme—‘The dies primus leti primusque malorum/Causa suit’—were realised by the artist in a picture of the utmost romantic splendour. Dark clouds lower over the landscape and, on the instructions of Juno, the winds prepare to pound the earth with driving rain as the young Trojan hero, oblivious of Cupid’s arrow aimed at his breast, hurries forward to accept the guiding hand of Dido, who looks back at him with eyes full of tender passion. The picture aroused the greatest enthusiasm and
Zanotti, L PP396 and 418.
Bologna (Plate 209) publishes a replica in the Scholz-Forni collection, Hamburg.

[Page 225]
interest. In Bologna Giovan Gioseffo dal Sole, who was working on his own. canvas of
Andromache weeping before Aeneas, heard of its arrival and insisted on coming to the
Buonaccorsi palace to see it.1 A Bolognese painter travelling across the hills to Macerata to examine the latest masterpiece by his Neapolitan rival—here indeed was proof that
Rome was no longer the great centre of cultural exchange that it had once been!
Yet we must not claim too much for the gallery. Giuseppe Gambarini2 and
Marcantonio Franceschini in Bologna,3 Gregorio Lazzarini4 and Antonio Balestra in
Venice,5 all of whom turned out further scenes from the poem were not men from whom anything very new could be expected. Their works have a clumsiness and a lack of conviction which suggests that the tradition of large-scale romantic history painting to which they harked back had been drained of vitality and was now little more than an empty academic exercise.
Indeed it was in-some of the other rooms in Raimondo’s palace that works by the more interesting and ‘modern’ painters of the day were to be found, and the striking contrast between these and the men who painted the scenes from the Aeneid shows that
Raimondo must have had a genuine awareness of their essential qualities. Thus Crespi, who was quite unsuited to heroic melodrama, was required to paint four fables,6 and the one that has survived—Leto turning the Shepherds into Frogs—shows with what engaging irony he could interpret the stories of classical mythology.7 The attitude of
Giuseppe Gambarini, who was also commissioned to paint pagan scenes, was rather different: more placid and more sensual and with none of Crespi’s humour.8 But he too was engaged in the characteristically eighteenth-century revolution of turning the great themes of antiquity, and even Christianity, into pretexts for genre.
Apart from the works of these masters we have few records of the collection.
Little or no trace can be found of Corrado Giaquinto, who is reported to have worked for the Buonaccorsi,9 forthe pictures were repeatedly split up among members of the family and no inventory has survived. It is, however, possible to suggest that Raimondo may have been among those many patrons of the dawning Age of the Enlightenment whose great public galleries looked back resolutely to the past, but whose private
2D. Miller, 1963 and 1964.
" 3 -Franceschini painted Mercury awaking Aeneas—Zanotti, I, p. 236, and an entry in the artist’s Libra dei Conti (Biblioteca Comunale, Bologna—MS. B.4067) which shows that he was paid 1000 lire.

[Page 226]
apartments were silled with smaller and more intimate pictures betraying a wholly new range of sensibility.
On a much more modest scale we can notice a somewhat similar conflict in the contemporary collection of Stefano Conti, a business man of Lucca.1 Though he owned only ninety-seven pictures, mostly of small dimensions, he too was forced by the very nature of his birthplace to look far outside his native province for talented artists. He confined himself to Bologna and Venice, and—partly by accident and partly by design
—lie managed in the process to acquire pictures by Crespi, Sebastiano Ricci, Canaletto and other leading eighteenth-century painters.
Conti was born in 1654 of a father who had been accepted into the Lucchese nobility some quarter of a century earlier. He himself carried on a flourishing trade in silks and cloth,, and we can see siom his will and other documents that he was an acute man of business. He married in 1685, but outlived both his wife and only son and died in 1739 at the age of 85. He began collecting quite suddenly at the end of 1704 after a journey which had taken him to Venice and Bologna, and for the next three years he methodically acquired a number of pictures in both cities in a spirit that suggests that he knew exactly what he wanted and had no intention of letting himself be carried away by any undue enthusiasm. He employed a local architect to construct a well-lit gallery, silled it with the right number of pictures, refused to sell them when pressed, and in his will tried to make sure that the collection should be preserved as a whole.
His dealings with the painters themselves were equally precise. He was a generous patron, but refused ever to pay more than he thought a picture was worth. He insisted that each work should be an originals painted for him alone and not copied. Though he allowed his artists complete freedom of choice as regards subject-matter, their pictures had to conform to certain specified sizes. And every artist was required to send him a written guarantee certifying the exact subject and date of his works.
When in Venice and Bologna—to which he subsequently returned on a number of occasions—Stefano Conti went to the studios of some of the leading artists and drew up his first commissions. At the same time he got in touch with a Veronese painter,
Alessandro Marchesini, from whom he at once ordered a number of pictures and whom he appointed his agent. For this post Marchesini was ideally suitable despite his very limited gifts. He lived in Venice, but had studied in the school of Carlo Cignani in
Bologna, siom which sprung all the leading artists in the city. He was thus in close contact with everybody, and he carried out his job with keenness and efficiency— pressing on those who showed signs of delay, writing regularly to his patron to keep him informed, handing out the advance payments, suggesting new artists, and even proposing alterations in the work of established masters.
Conti was apt to pay his artists according to the number of figures in each picture,

[Page 227]
and this sometimes led to problems. ‘It is a little difficult’, wrote Marcantonio Franceschini from Bologna,1 ‘to find a history or fable with two figures and putti, and I would like the gentleman himself to choose what he wants.’ However, he went on to propose various subjects—sacred and profane at random: Adam and Eve, Bacchus and Ariadne and so on, ending up that ‘what I would really like to do would be a fanciful pastoral with a shepherd, a nymph and two or three putti in atto bizzarre e curio so . And the suggestion was accepted. Other artists had more ambitious ideas. Also in Bologna,
Felice Torelli wanted to paint a scene from Trojan history2—‘Pyrrhus killing Polyxena in the temple and there will be Chalchas, the soothsayer, and other half-length figures or heads depicting Aeneas and Antinorus-—in fact everything that is needed for the history, and also the tomb of Acliilles, the father of Pyrrhus.’ Conti was equally ready to accept a picture of this kind, but when it eventually arrived he wrote to ask once more what exactly it represented. -
The Venetian artists were on the whole less imaginative in their choice of subject— stock scenes from the Bible and mythology were their usual standby; there is a definite preponderance of religious painting, and evenLazzarini, who was so much admired for his nudes, painted six subjects from the Old and New Testaments of impeccable morality.3
Conti’s gallery, when completed by about 1707, must have presented a notably
’ ‘academic’ appearance. The artists he had chosen—Marchesini himself, Lazzarini,
Balestra, Fumiani, Bellucci, Angiolo Trevisani, Segala, Dal Sole and Franceschini— were all of his own generation and mostly adhered to ‘correct’ drawing and blond tonality in opposition to the violent tenebrosi who had enjoyed such a success in Venice.
But his interests were not confined only to history painters. He had the portraits of his wife, his son and himself painted by Sebastiano Bombelli, the leading portraitist in the city—a local artist, Antonio Franchi, was considered good enough for his three daughters
—and he also commissioned seven pictures of fruit and animals from Giovanni Agostino
Cassana, a number of landscapes by other artists and three views of Venice by Luca
Carlevarijs. Busts of Diana and Endymion by the Bolognese Giuseppe Mazza completed the gallery.
With all this Stefano Conti was satisfied for nearly twenty years, during which he bought only three pictures—a ‘Correggio’ Christ in the Garden of Olives, a Guercino
Flight into Egypt and a Cain and Abel by the local artist Domenico Brugiori. Then in
- 1725, as suddenly as ever, he began to resume collecting. To Alessandro Marchesini’s great delight, Conti turned once more to him for advice. Evidently some spare room had been found, because Conti was trying to get two further views by Carlevarijs to add to the three that he already owned, and one landscape by Francesco Bassi, il
Cremonese, to make a complete set of four. But in the previous twenty years the artistic situation in Venice had been completely transformed. Carlevarijs, wrote Marchesini, was

[Page 228]
old and il Cremonese was blind. Instead there was a ‘Sigr. Antonio Canale, who astounds everyone who sees his work in this city—it is like that of Carlevarijs, but you can see the sun shining in it’, and also ‘a remarkable landscape painter, whose works are in great demand here and in London ... with a style very much of his own and a very perfected manner... . . Ricci is a marvellous painter at producing views and strange landscapes with buildings in the style of Poussin, all in lively and brilliant colour, which enchants those who look at them.’ And so, under constant pressure from Marchesini, Conti commissioned his first two paintings by Canaletto and then, so pleased was he with the result, another two, despite the artist’s difficult behaviour over money, and eventually five little landscapes with ruins and figures by Marco Ricci. Marco’s uncle, Sebastiano, inserted the figures in these, but when he was asked to paint on his own ‘two history pictures with full-length figures of half natural size ... which must represent Alexander the Great and must hang opposite two others by good Bolognese artists’, Ricci asked a price which the cautious Conti found exorbitant, and the proposal came to nothing.
He did, however, buy a portrait by Rosalba Garriera of his daughter-in-law Emmanuela, and three years later, in 1728, he commissioned his last picture which was to be by
Crespi.1 Negotiations took place directly between the two men and began with some difficulty when Crespi haughtily explained that he had always had correct written contracts ‘from His Highness the late Grand Prince Ferdinand, from the late Pope, and from Prince Eugene of Savoy in whose service I now am’. After this had been satisfactorily settled he wrote at great length to describe the subject he had chosen, The Infant
Jupiter handed over by Cybele to the Corybantes to be fed (Plate 67), and enclosed a sketch which was ‘to serve as an embryo’. However, when sending the painting itself in April
1729, he changed the title to The Finding of Moses, as sacred pictures paid lower customs duty than profane ones!
This little group of pictures by Crespi, Canaletto, Marco and Sebastiano Ricci, with their nervous brush strokes and dramatic contrasts of light and shade, must have looked strangely isolated in Conti’s collection of essentially old-fashioned paintings, and he did nothing to increase their number. His taste was never very adventurous and his greatest interest was apparently to fill his gallery with accredited works. Like many of the other patrons who lived in small towns and ordered pictures from elsewhere, he had no chance to see the paintings he had commissioned until they reached him in
Lucca. This was, indeed, the limitation of most of these provincial collections. Pictures from Bologna, Venice, Naples and even Rome might hang together and enrich local taste, but the artists themselves remained isolated both from each other and from the guidance of a cultivated patron. There was, however, one very significant exception to this general state of affairs.
-iiiThe most important figure in this strange interregnum of Italian art when any overriding sense of direction seemed to have been lost was, appropriately enough, a Medici.

[Page 229]
For a few years Florence once more became the most interesting city in Italy before sinking into utter provincialism. In the Grand Prince Ferdinand who was responsible for this short-lived but profoundly important revival we can see, as in no other single figure, the tastes of the seventeenth century changing into those of the eighteenth, and this alone makes him worthy of the closest to study (Plate 36a). But his significance is greater than that. As a Medici he bore a name that still carries its own magic. And he was a munificent patron when the race seemed to have died out—‘the only support of all the sine arts in Italy’, wrote a contemporary.1 His individual tastes were thus of considerable importance for the development of painting.
He was born in 1663, the son of Cosimo III and Marguerite d’Orléans.2 The tempestuous relationship between his parents—his mother, unable to stand the suffocating atmosphere of Florence, left in 1675 for the freedom of a convent in Montmartre which placed few obstacles in the way of her volatile appetites—and the bigoted pomposity of Cosimo himself left its mark on the two sons of the marriage: Ferdinand, who died at 50 before ruling, and Gian Gastone, the last of the Medici princes. Both were highly intelligent, but both had a streak of instability which in Gian Gastone eventually led to paralysing debauchery. Ferdinand was educated by all the most remarkable personalities in a city that was still notable in the intellectual Europe of the day—Viviani, Lorenzini, Redi. He became a highly cultivated and accomplished figure, handsome, good humoured, an excellent horseman and the great hope of all those who longed for a change from the extravagant, yet mean-spirited rule, of his father.
This is the side of him that most of his contemporaries saw. But we have at our disposal letters, private memoirs and other records, and as we look back we can detect also another aspect of his character, and one that was to be profoundly reflected in his artistic tastes: a sort of fin-de-siecle preciosity in reaction against the stuffiness of his
‘Victorian’ surroundings,. a love of frisson, an inclination for somewhat equivocal pleasures. All his biographers stress that Ferdinand’s reaction against his father was one of the dominating emotions of his fife. With his uncle Francesco Maria, only three years older than himself, he led the opposition, and, as so often where political activity is out of the question, this took the form of licence and wild behaviour. Accompanied everywhere by troops of followers in search of pleasure, the two young men outraged the solemn decorum of the court much as Marguerite d’Orléans had done already.
Eventually marriage was insisted on and agreed to in return for permission to visit
Venice at carnival time. After some futile negotiations with Portugal, a rather plain
Bavarian princess, Violante, was discovered and wedded with spectacular ceremonies but little love. Year after year the court, and Europe, waited in-vain for an heir to ensure the survival of the Medici line. A second reckless—and bachelor—visit to Venice in 1696 was scarcely calculated to promote this end, and during the early years of the eighteenth century other members of the family were called upon to try where the Grand Prince
See Galluzzi and, for more intimate details of the private lives of these last members of the family,
Pieraccini, G. Conti and Acton.

[Page 230]
had failed. Their efforts too came to nothing. Meanwhile Ferdinand gave up the struggle and retired to his country houses, especially Poggio a Caiano and Pratolino, there to enjoy himself and to organise his brilliant theatrical displays and picture collections.
He was passionately fond of music and for many years he employed Alessandro Scarlatti to write operas for him and himself played a notable part in their composition.1 His theatre at Pratolino was famous throughout Italy and for it he employed leading stage designers such as members of the Bibbiena family.2 He corresponded with artists and musicians and his great sensibilities made him the most discriminating patron of many of the most interesting painters of the day. He welcomed foreign scholars and delighted to show them his great collections. He supported writers such as Apostolo Zeno,
Benedetto Menzini and Scipione Maffei, and he financed the pubheation of sumptuous editions of Francesco Redi and other poets.3 But now ill-health began to strike: epileptic fits and, apparently, the inevitable consequences of his earlier dissipation. His last years were more and more clouded by sickness, and he died in 1713 at the age of 50. His tyrannical old father was still on the throne after forty-three years. It was as if the
Regent had died before Louis XIV. ‘With his death,’ wrote a contemporary admirer,4
‘there died too all signs of brio and joyfulness in Florence and Tuscany. With his death there was lost the protector of painting, sculpture, letters and all the other liberal arts— for other princes did not share his magnanimous tastes.’
The most important events in Ferdinand’s life were his two visits to Venice. The city already had the reputation it long retained of allowing and encouraging every pleasure known to man except that of political unorthodoxy, and the Grand Prince took full advantage of most of them. We can follow him throughout February and
March 1696, ‘delighted’ from the very first day ‘with the freedom of this country— especially the convenience of the mask which allows him to go anywhere without drawing attention to himself.. .’.5 Night after night he goes to the opera and the ridotto; he visits all the specialities of Venetian carnival entertainment which we know so well from the paintings just then beginning to record them for tourists—the forze d’Ercole, the fight between the Castellani and the Nicolotti, the masked balls. The Republic gave him lavish presents and he reciprocated. It was all very different from Florence; no wonder that when he left he announced his intention of returning to Venice for the next carnival. He never did: but the memory haunted him for the rest of his life and he was able to put it to good use. For besides more spectacular pleasures, so diligently recorded by the Florentine agents, he had also been carefully admiring and studying
See also Fabbri and, for a full account of his musical activities, Puliti.
Archivio Mediceo, Filza 3050: Matteo del Teglia—Carteggio e Avvisi da Venezia, 1695-7.

[Page 231]
the great pictures which still made Venetian collections and churches the richest in
Europe. Years later he could recall some of them which he hoped to acquire for himself.
In the masterpieces of Titian, Veronese and Bassano which filled the palaces of his hosts he saw a tradition of painting which had long been considered the antithesis to the great
Florentine Renaissance. Ferdinand, like many other lively spirits of the early years of the eighteenth century, was seduced by this tradition and longed to make it live again.
Although Ferdinand had always been a keen collector and patron, his forcible personality could not find much scope for expression in Florentine art of the late seventeenth century. His early acquired pictures differed little from those that were regularly to be seen in the average noble collection of the day. They included, for instance, a number of religious works painted for him by Baldassare Franceschini, a late follower of Pietro da Cortona who died in 1689? Yet quite soon he relied on his unerring instinct to pick out the one picture by this artist which could satisfy his love of novelty. Some time before 1693 he bought La Burla del Pievano Arlotto which
Franceschini had painted in tempera many years earlier for a private citizen (Plate 37c).2
Its homely and archaic simplicity owed more both in style and in the inspiration of its subject to Tuscan narrative of the fifteenth century than.to experiments in naturalism being made elsewhere in Italy at this time. It was, however, not very long before
Ferdinand had the opportunity of encouraging a comparable type of intimacy in the works of Crespi.
Meanwhile he showed his appreciation of the great tradition of Florentine painting by purchasing Fra Bartolommeo’s S. Marco from the church dedicated to that saint and having it replaced by a copy in 1692.3 This was, indeed, a habit to which Ferdinand was much addicted. During the 1690s he bought from various churches in Florence and elsewhere Raphael’s Madonna del Baldacchino, Andrea del Sarto’s Madonna delle Arpie,
Cigoli’s Deposition and Orazio Riminaldi’s Martyrdom of St CeciliaA Of his contemporaries he showed an interest chiefly hi Anton Domenico Gabbiani, a painter faithful, as far as his talents lay, to the classical, Marattesque canons of art5 to whom Ferdinand remained loyal long after his own horizons had been immeasurably widened.
This widening was clearly brought about by his visits to Venice, though a taste for Venetian art had already appeared at the Medici court through the activities of his great uncle Cardinal Leopold, who had amassed a very large collection of works by masters of the Renaissance. Ferdinand now set out to amplify this collection. The names ofTitian, Veronese, Bassano, Palma Giovane and many other painters of the Venetian sixteenth century constantly recur in the letters which he wrote over the next few

[Page 232]
years to Niccolo Cassana, the Genoese artist who acted as his agent in Venice as from
1698? From these letters it is possible to sec just what he admired in the Venetians. The expressions which he uses most frequently to show approval are gran gusto or buon gusto
—vague terms, perhaps, but ones that suggest his relish for painting. When used, as they so often are, about particular pictures, they give us a close insight into the nature of his feelings: a Veronese is admired because it is ‘di un gran gusto di colore, bizzarre per Tinvenzione, e pare uscito adcsso dal penello dcH’Autore’; an engraving is ‘molto bizzarro, e di buon gusto’; an artist working for him is required to paint ‘qualche cosa di bizzarro’; another is told to be ‘meno flemmatico’. He sees a Maffei for the first time and is delighted with its ‘bellissimo impasto’; in Livorno there is a Rape of the Sabines by Virgilio Bassanino which looks like a Strozzi and ‘vi è un brio di pennello grande’; a Van Dyck bozzetto is ‘spiritoso’. From these expressions and from many more we can gauge an entirely coherent taste based on an appreciation of the liveliness of the individual brushstroke and of colour—for him of very much greater importance than the correct drawing which played such a vital part in Roman art theory at the time. He showed an acute sensitivity to the actual quality of the paint, to that belle matière which was to be so very attractive to eighteenth-century connoisseurs. Like many of these connoisseurs, but unlike most of the great aristocratic collectors to whom by origin and status he belonged, Ferdinand combined this sensitivity with a very real understanding of artistic quality, and hence was able to show great discrimination in his appreciation of pictures. In a Rubens he suspects that one of the satyrs was added rather later than the others, and that there is a certain difference of touch in the foliage of the trees; he gives detailed practical instructions on how to pack a picture; he reads through Lives of the Painters; he jokes about those who cannot distinguish the work of one artist from another.
Such knowledge and refinement not only began to affect his collecting—in 1698 he bought Parmigianino’s Madonna del Collo Lungo ‘disegnata come da Raffaello, sinita con 1’anima’2—but were vital in his patronage of contemporary artists. Yet with two conspicuous exceptions he was not as successful in this field as his talents entitled him to be, for the whole trend of art theory conflicted with his personal tastes and it was not easy to find painters unaffected by the classicising doctrines of this phase of the
Baroque.
For Ferdinand art patronage involved, a greater degree of collaboration than was usual between prince and painter. This might range from sending his court painter an eagle to help with a Ganymede to discussing the figures of a composition.3 His attitude is clearly shown in a significant remark he lets slip in a letter to Cassana4: ‘Tell Fumiani that the only figure I want is that of David; it will then be easy enough to remove it and do it in our way.’ He insisted on always seeing tnodelli of the pictures he ordered, as

[Page 37]
a. G. M. Crespi: The Painter’s family b. G. M. Crespi: The Fair at Poggio a Caiano
. (detail)

[Page 38]
IN PITTI PALACE, FLORENCE (see Plates 38 and 39)
a. Rape of Europa
b. Pan and Syrinx

[Page 40]
a. A. D. Gabbiani: A group of musicians

[Page 233]
much for purely aesthetic reasons as for checking the accuracy of the content. Indeed he collected modelli of pictures painted for other patrons before this was as common as it later became.1 He enjoyed watching artists at work and discussing with them the actual procedure of painting—the colours to be used, the thickness of the canvas and so on.
All these traits can be seen in his relations with Gabbiani (Plate 40a). The reasons why he employed for so long this rather mediocre, Marattesque painter while ignoring other
Florentine artists such as Gherardini, Sagrestani or Galeotti whose styles corresponded far more to his tastes are impossible to fathom.2 It may have been that same feeling of loyalty that made him take particular trouble not to hurt the ageing landscape painter
Francesco Bassi despite the doubts he had about the value of his work.3 More likely it was the feeling that Gabbiani (who always professed a passionate attachment to Venetian painting) was directly under his control and so could be used to express some of his own artistic'ambitions. Whatever the reasons, the outcome was hardly very successful despite a special visit to Venice which Gabbiani paid in 1699 at the age of 47 to oblige his patron by improving his colour. Nor does Ferdinand’s particular protege Sacconi appear to have lived up to his hopes, though he too was sent to Venice.4 The Grand
Prince took the deepest interest in his career. He provided for him financially when his father died and kept him working under Niccolo Cassana. Constant exhortations and orders followed him there: for a St Sebastian ‘as he must learn to paint full length figures’, a St Giustina, a Bacchanal. Ferdinand notes that his colour is improving under
Cassana’s guidance, but warns him to be ‘meno flemmatico’. He arranges for his pictures to be exhibited on Corpus Domini and is delighted with their humour. But it seems that not even Venice and the most encouraging of patrons could make much of the artist.
More fruitful were Ferdinand’s contacts with some of the other painters living in
Venice, among them Karl Loth with whom he must have got in touch on his first visit, for this German artist was already painting for him by 1691 and continued to do so until his death some seven years later.5 But by then, although he made particular efforts to get hold of some half-length figures by Loth ‘as that is what he was best at’, Ferdinand had already paid his second visit to the city and found there an artist who, despite his mediocre abilities, was ideally responsive to the sort of pressure he liked to exert. The

[Page 234]
relations between Giannaritonio Fumiani and the Grand Prince can tell ns much about the fantasies which he was so eager to have expressed by the artists who worked for him.1
He wanted a picture to match one by Domenichino and he proceeded to give Fumiani its dimensions and a very elaborate programme. It must show, he wrote to his agent
Cassana, an architectural background into which must be inserted guards; in the foreground David must be seen at prayer. Cassana himself is to paint the figure of David, though if Fumiani insists he may do so and it can be changed later. He must send the modello to Ferdinand for inspection. It duly arrived and proved satisfactory, but David, commented the Prince, should display more movement. Perhaps it would be improved by an angel flying through the sky with a flaming sword and offering the king the choice of the three punishments.2 David must show great surprise—here would be a good chance for expressing movement. Besides, the composition could be enriched by placing at his side his harp, lais sceptre and his diadem. And then Ferdinand changed his mind. He wanted another subject from the Old Testament which would be the most bizzarra of all. The instructions have been lost, but this was evidently to be The Stoning of Zechariah, a picture which was recorded in Ferdinand’s inventory and which is now in the Uffizi (Plate 40b).3 It seems clear that these subjects, though unusual in art, held no special significance for him other than as pretexts for fanciful composition.
Niccolo Cassana also worked a good deal for Ferdinand as painter as well as artistic adviser. He visited Florence on various occasions chiefly so as to paint portraits of the Prince and his household, and from time to time he would send pictures from
Venice.4 In September 1707 his Portrait os a Cook reached Florence to the delight of the
Prince, who commented on its realistic details (he particularly wanted to know who the sitter was) and above all on its bold, Venetian, ‘painterly’ quality, so different, as he pointed out, from the timid efforts of native Florentine artists. Cassana also painted history pictures for the Grand Prince, mostly in a light vein—a Bacchanal, a Venus playing with Cupid and so on, though there was also a Conspiracy of Catiline.5
Giovanni Battista Langetti, another Genoese artist who worked in Venice, was also admired by
Ferdinand. Ratti (Soprani/Ratti, H, 26), who reports seeing a portrait and a picture of card players by him in the Medici collection, says that Langetti was actually employed by Ferdinand in Florence. But this is impossible as Langetti died in 1676 when the Prince was only aged 11. See also Fogolari, 1937, Letter

[Page 23]
Much more valuable were the pictures on glass of The Flight into Egypt painted, for Ferdinand by Luca Giordano. The great Neapolitan painter called on the Grand
Prince at Livorno in May 1702 on his return from Spain and is known to have worked for him for a time before setting out for home.1
The history of Ferdinand’s patronage given so far suggests that with this one exception he was a very much more interesting figure than any of the painters who worked for him. And indeed he would be remembered merely as a remarkable personality in an artistic backwater were it not for the fact that towards the very end of his life he found two artists whose talents were at last equal to the demands he made on them and who consequently painted for him some of their most striking work.
It is not clear how Ferdinand first got into touch with Sebastiano Ricci, for the artist was not in Venice during either of the Grand Prince’s two visits there. However that may be, in 1704 Ferdinand commissioned from him a Crucifixion with the Madonna,
St John and St Charles Borromeo to replace Andrea del Sarto’s Madonna delle Arpie which he had bought from the nuns of S. Francesco de’ Macci for his own gallery.2 Ricci seems to have paid a short visit to Florence in order to paint the picture on the spot and thereafter to have assisted Cassana in his duties of keeping the Prince informed as to what pictures were available on the Venetian market.3 Within a year or two Ricci had already found other patrons in Florence among the Grand Prince’s circle of friends, for the brothers Marucelli.of whom Francesco, the most distinguished, had died in Rome in
1703, were employing him to decorate several rooms in their palace. In May 1706 he enclosed some paintings for them in the two crates he sent to the Grand Princewhich
. included a couple of small landscapes by his nephew Marco.4 At the same time he made his first allusion to a forthcoming visit to Florence to paint a room in Ferdinand’s gallery of Venetian pictures at Poggio a Caiano. Ferdinand’s reply a week later was somewhat discouraging: ill-health was causing him to postpone the projected scheme.5
However, shortly afterwards the situation improved and Ricci arrived to paint an
Allegory of the Arts in Ferdinand’s favourite gallery in his favourite villa. This work has unfortunately been destroyed, but dazzling testimonials to Ricci’s Florentine activities survive in the great decorations that he painted for Ferdinand’s friends the Marucelli and for the Grand Prince himself in a small room in the Pitti.
In questo si rappresentano allegorie convenienti alle Arti sorelle ecc.’

[Page 236]
From everything we know of Ferdinand’s patronage it is beyond doubt that he himself must have collaborated extensively in the work. Indeed, some forty years later, a writer who knew Ricci personally makes it quite clear that he had followed specific instructions from the Grand Prince in carrying out the decoration.1 There is, of course, no record of these, but it is easy enough to see that Ricci’s delightful frescoes, which represent a new departure in his career, reflect the more lighthearted and ‘avantgarde’ atmosphere of Ferdinand’s court. The Prince’s own character, indeed, symbolised the fact that the new century was going to be less harsh, less bigoted, and less passionate than the one that was just over, and it is this change that seems to be asserted in Ricci’s frescoes. The heavy drama which had marked most Baroque ceiling decoration, the crowds of solidly built figures which had been characteristic of Ricci’s previous ventures in the field and even to some extent of his almost contemporary work in the Palazzo
Marucelli, here give way at a single bound to delicacy and lightness of touch. The ceiling is a glorification ofsun and air—a pale, cool blue sky with delicate pink clouds on which
Venus, in brilliant yellow, takes her leave from Adonis dressed in a gay, purple tunic inspired by costumes of the sixteenth century (Plate 39)? Putti hover around, and below, on a rocky verge, strain two greyhounds, sleek and slender, the favourite animals of the new century. There is a delicate longing in the look between the two lovers, but no hint of the tragedy to come. Around the walls, and in elaborate cartouches above a painted balustrade, are further scenes from Ovid—Diana and Callisto, Pan and
Syrinx, Europa and the Bull, Diana and Actaeon (Plates 38a, 38b)—and in the four corners are painted busts of men and women vaguely evoking the antique. Over the main door angels support a shield with the Medici arms while putti with a crown hover above, the whole forming a brilliant asymmetrical composition. Everything is painted with a verve and a nervous, fluent panache that were totally new to Florence and indeed to
European art. The frescoes delighted Ferdinand, and yet their intimate, rococo style, which was to become so popular in the boudoirs of Paris, proved to have little suture in Italy.
Ricci also painted various pictures for him at this time, particularly of little figures disporting themselves against architectural backgrounds which were usually the work of a collaborator. These especially appealed to his taste—‘le figurette mi piacciono assaissimo, perche sono graziose, ben distribuite e fatte con poco’, he wrote of one pair of such scenes he had been shown,3 and macchiette of this kind were to become enormously popular as the century progressed. Ricci wrote again to Ferdinand in 1708 after

[Page 237]
his return to Venice, but a year later he went to England and stayed abroad until
1716.
The Grand Prince was not the only person to be impressed by Ricci’s work in
Florence. Back in Bologna in February 1708, after a brief visit to the Medici capital,
Giuseppe Maria Crespi wrote to Ferdinand that he too had been very struck by the
Venetian painter’s ‘spirit’.1 And although the two most interesting artists of the period, both of whom were pioneering a decisive break with late Baroque conventions, missed meeting each other by two or three months at Ferdinand’s court, the new mood that prevailed there profoundly affected them both. Crespi’s own innovations had'much in common with Ricci’s—a looser brush stroke, a more painterly and spirited manner, a greater display of individual temperament and a devotion to the Venetian tradition; it is therefore hardly surprising that he received all possible encouragement from
Ferdinand when he arrived in Florence at the beginning of 1708 to present him his
Massacre of the Innocents.2 Crespi’s anxiety to work for Ferdinand provides clear evidence of the importance that the Grand Prince’s court had by now assumed for artists outside
Florence,3 and when he brought the picture to Ferdinand he was deeply impressed by his discrimination and enthusiasm. The Grand Prince at once commissioned a couple of still lives from Crespi—a curious and significant choice of subject after the dazzling agitation of the history painting which had introduced the artist to him.4 In fact,
Ferdinand is of great importance in Crespi’s career partly for this very reason. He seems to have been among the first to appreciate the essentially intimate nature of Crespi’s talents. The commissions with which he flooded the artist were all ‘d’argomenti piacevoli’, and with the support of such a powerful protector Crespi was able to break away from the religious and secular histories which had hitherto formed the bulk of his output. On this first visit to Florence he remained scarcely more than a month5; but he
Ferdinand himself took a hand in the disputes and litigation from which Crespi emerged victorious. See letters-between Ferdinand and Silva in Archivio Mediceo, Filza 3904, Nos. 96, 155, 299 and 607; and also letter from Ferdinand to the Marchesa Eleonora Zambeccari in Archivio Mediceo, Filza 5897, No. 287.
Other Bolognese artists in touch with Ferdinand were Ercole Graziani, Giovan Gioseffo Santi (Zanotti, I, pp. 263 and 210) and Giovan Gioseffo dal Sole—sec letters of April and May 1708 in Archivio
Mediceo, Filza 5904, Nos. 44 and 64.
He was back in Bologna by February 26,1708—see above, note 1.

[Page 238]
was clearly as anxious to maintain his connection with Ferdinand as was the latter to make use of a painter whose gifts so exactly suited his own temperament. Hardly had he returned to Bologna at the end of February before he began sending pictures to his new patron—a Nativity arrived early in March, followed by a Self portrait a month later with assurances of the artist’s eternal remembrance of the Prince’s kindness and promises of his own ‘vasallaggio’. The Prince wrote back to say how delighted he was with the
Selfportrait that showed the artist’s good humour1 and thereafter the friendship between the two men was sealed. Indeed Ferdinand’s interest in Crespi brought him into touch with the artist’s patrons in Bologna—particularly Giovanni Ricci, the rich marchandamateur who had financed his early travels throughout Italy and subsequently acquired a very large proportion of his work; and also the Pepoli family in whose palace he had some fifteen years earlier painted the great ceiling frescoes which first established his reputation as a considerable and highly original master. Now in 1708 the Pepoli were considering structural alterations to the palace which would involve destroying the frescoes, and only two urgent letters from Ferdinand stopped this plan being carried out.2
Meanwhile throughout 1708 Crespi continued to work for him. In December he sent a copy of Guercino’s St William of Aquitaine as well as his own small painting of
The Painter’s Family, the most informal portrait group that had yet appeared in Italian art and a striking testimony to Crespi’s confidence in Ferdinand’s tastes (Plate 37a).3
During these months he also sent a satirical picture of the priest who had originally commissioned the Massacre of the Innocents as a gift for Ferdinand and had then failed to stick to the agreement between them, as well as two small genre scenes of Children at Play and Women washing their Laundry at a Fountain—an early treatment of a subject that was to be immensely popular with artists throughout the eighteenth century.4
In 1709 Crespi returned to Florence with his family and was given rooms by
Ferdinand in his villa at Pratolino, where he stayed for several months. During this visit he painted a large number of pictures for the Grand Prince, who collected his work with increasing enthusiasm and who showed his appreciation with lavish presents and by consenting to become godfather to Crespi’s newborn son, called Ferdinando in his honour. At the same time he gave official recognition to Crespi’s position at court by naming him his ‘pittore attuale’. Crespi responded with a great many genre scenes and one of his masterpieces, the Fair at Poggio a Caiano, which included portraits of
Ferdinand’s courtiers (Plate 37b).6
By the beginning of November he was back in Bologna.8 It is possible that he paid a third visit to Florence, but by this time Ferdinand’s final illness was upon him and the

[Page 239]
great days of his patronage were over.1 Crespi is indeed the last artist whom we know to have worked for him...
Both painter and patron had benefited greatly from the close partnership between them. Ferdinand was the most cultivated and sensitive collector that Crespi had yet (or ever was to) come across, and in his gallery the artist was able to study at length those
Venetian painters whom they both loved. That he took full advantage of this is proved by a letter in which he speaks of having been shown in the Medici collections a picture attributed to Tintoretto which had in fact been painted by himself.2 Fully as important was die support that Ferdinand gave him in his attempts to break away from the conventional ‘history picture’. Such new ventures were bound to result in some loss of prestige and to meet with derision. The humour with which all his contemporaries approached Crespi in some ways reflects their bewilderment at his unconventional painting, and for many of them (and for many years later) it coloured their appreciation of his art. Genre scenes were expected to be humorous and so they laughed, without realising that Crcspi’s humour was often tinged with melancholy and was in any case counteracted by a deep, poetic sympathy for the people whom he painted. It is difficult to say how much Ferdinand himself shared these misconceptions about Crespi’s art.
His recorded opinions and—much more important—his letters suggest that he too saw him primarily as a humourist3; on the other hand the very great restraint with which the artist painted for him subjects which lay themselves open to gross or bawdy treatment (Plate 36b) makes clear that he must have relied on Ferdinand’s appreciating a side ef his temperament that was ignored by many. Indeed, the unique place held by
Ferdinand in the history of Italian patronage is shown by the fact that such sober, sympathetic treatment of the poor and simple remained quite exceptional in Italian art.
With the backing of a cultivated middle class Crespi might have turned into the Chardin to whom he is sometimes so near; in fact with the removal from the scene of Ferdinand, the most ‘modern’ prince of the age in Italy—and as yet only princes could be influential patrons—Crespi retired into the provincial backwater of Bologna.4
The pictures that Ferdinand amassed were distributed in his apartments in the Pitti
Palace and in the various country houses through which he moved during the year.
By the end of his life their numbers were very considerable. In the Pitti alone were 300 entirely from his private collection, quite apart from the many which had been assembled by earlier members of the family.5 The accent was strongly on Venetian pictures,
‘ 4 The restricting effect of this on Crespi’s art has been pointed out by R. Longhi in his introduction to the 1948 exhibition catalogue.

[Page 240]
including about ten attributed to Titian. There were also Flemish works, but only the barest representation of contemporary Roman painting. Of the Florentine school of the day only one artist was present in bulk; the Flemish Livio Mehus, thirty of whose works Ferdinand owned. Such prominence is not surprising, for Mehus was by far the most Venetian of all the artists in his entourage and his tremendous vivacity combined with a slightly troubled eroticism made an obvious appeal to Ferdinand. Only the death of this painter in 1691, before Ferdinand’s patronage had reached its fullest extent, can have prevented him working directly for the Grand Prince who sought to make amends for this neglect by assiduously collecting his canvases and giving support to his son.1
In Poggio a Caiano Ferdinand had a special room in which he kept small examples of each of his favourite artists, ancient and contemporary, and it was this that Sebastiano
Ricci painted for him in 1707. He kept further large collections at Pratolino and the
Villa di Castello.
But Ferdinand’s activities as patron were not confmed to increasing his own collection or supporting those particular artists who took his fancy. He was also anxious to guide the whole direction taken by painters in the Florence of his day. For this purpose he took advantage of the still rudimentary instrumentof the art exhibition and used it in an entirely new way. Pictures had been exhibited in Florence, as in many other Italian cities, on the occasion of the Corpus Domini processions, and Ferdinand regularly showed works painted for him by those artists of whom he approved, such as
Gabbiani, whose Flight into Egypt he put on view to the public in the Piazza del Duomo.2
He adopted the same policy towards Sacconi3 and especially Cassana to whom he wrote in 1707, full of admiration for the ‘gran gusto’ of his Portrait of a Cook which he intended to exhibit so that it would be seen ‘by our own artists here who paint so timidly’? But Ferdinand probably found such exhibitions too casual to produce the effect he hoped for, and by 1706 he had already organised something far grander. He had probably picked up the idea from the S. Rocco exhibitions in Venice (to be described in a later chapter), though he ran his own one on far more spectacular lines.
A printed catalogue was issued—and this in itself was an innovation for Italy.5 From this catalogue we can reconstruct the event. The exhibition was held on St Luke’s day (18
October) in the chapel dedicated to that saint in the cloisters of the Annunziata. About

[Page 241]
who thus unmistakably showed his patronage of the whole venture. No less clear was the orientation of his taste, and hence the general impulse he wished to give to contemporary art. Of the twenty-odd pictures he lent in all, seven were Venetian old masters—a Giorgione, a Titian, a Veronese, a Tintoretto, a Pordenone, a Schiavone and a Paris Bordone; there were also an early Guercino, a Lodovico Carracci and a
Schedoni. Besides these he lent his Guido Cagnacci Magdalene (‘di colore freschissimo’),1 his Cassana Portrait of a Hunter and, almost certainly, four landscapes by Marco Ricci.2
Not a single work by any of the Florentine artists, old or new, represented in his collection was shown by the Grand Prince. The hint could hardly have been clearer, and it was reinforced by further Venetian paintings lent by Cardinal Medici. In general, the
Venetians made an impressive showing in the exhibition, though there was also a strong
Neapolitan contingent mainly lent by the del Rosso brothers: thus Luca Giordano was much in evidence... '
The Grand Prince himself attended the exhibition which remained open for several days and was evidently a success. But Ferdinand soon fell seriously ill, and thereafter the Accademia del Disegno, under whose auspices it had been organised, returned to the slumbers which had characterised most of its recent existence. Exhibitions, planned on similar lines, took place at haphazard intervals in 1715, 1724, 1729, 173 7 and 1767?
But Ferdinand died before any of these.
By the time of his death the Venetian school of painting was widely recognised as the most lively in Italy. Though he did not see the triumphs of its greatest masters, he had derived immense satisfaction from his promotion of all that was most vital in contemporary art. For a few years he turned Florence into a centre of the ‘painterly’, in direct opposition to the classical-academic theories which dictated practice in Rome, and it is not surprising that artists who rightly felt that their talents would have been stifled in the papal city should have been delighted to work for him. It is for this reason that he plays such a notable part in any account of Italian art patronage, and we can at least understand, if not wholly endorse, the opinion of a mid-eighteenth-century writer that he had been a prince ‘unrivalled in the world for his magnanimity and generosity’.4
By that time, as he had anticipated, the most interesting Italian painting was to be found in Venice itself.5 .

**Footnotes:**
1 Pesenti.
2 Unless specially indicated, all die documents here are taken from the very full article by Angelo Pinetti, 1916. The interpretation put on these documents is naturally my own, though it will be seen that I have followed Pinetti closely. I am most grateful to Signorina Dora Coggiola of the Biblioteca Cívica, Bergamo, for her great help.
1 See a number of letters published by Bottari, H, pp. 47-56, and III, pp. 352-4.
1 Bottari, HI, pp. 355-6.
1 An anonymous article in Bergomum, 1947, pp. 60-1, has shown that the subject represented was in fact the Hymn of Liberation after the Crossing.
2 Tassi, I, p. 265.
1 Bonari, III, pp. 361-9.
1 Another church in Bergamo which, early in the eighteenth century, employed leading painters in several Italian towns was S. Paolo d’Argan. Among those who worked for it were G. M. Crespi in Bologna and Lazzarini, Ricci, Balestra and others in Venice as well as some local artists in Bergamo itself—Angelo Pinetti, 1920.
2 For the outlines of his career see Moroni, Vol. 69, pp. 215-16.
1 This account of the Archbishop’s palace, which is still today exactly as described, is taken from the most tantalising document I came across during the course of my researches. It is a manuscript in the Biblioteca Ariostea, Ferrara—Collezione Antonelli MS. 610—Calleria di Pitture raccolte, ed esposte nel Palazzo Vescovale di Ferrara dall em.mo e rev.mo Sig.r Card.l Tommaso Ruffo Vescovo di detta Città, e Legato a Latere di Bologna descritta da Girolamo Baruffaldi. After a long account of the palace comes the word Galleria, only to be followed by the following sentence: ‘Ma il Card. Ruffo, annoiato, e malcontento dell’ Arcivescovado di Ferrara lo rassegnò al Sommo Pontefice, e se ne andò a Roma portando seco le Pitture della sua Galleria, onde levò a me il contento, e l’onore di poterla più descrivere.
2 The list of Russo’s pictures was published with verse commentaries by J. Agnelli.
3 Breval, 1738,1, p. 193.
6 Both of these, together with other pictures from Ruffo’s collection, are now in the Museo di Palazzo Venezia in Rome. They are referred to by Zanotti, II, p. 56, and L. Crespi, p. 214. See also Santangelo, pp. 2 and 23.
1 Zanotti, II, p. 115, and L. Crespi, p. 259.
3 De Dominici, IV, p. 538, and Moroni, XII, p. 71. He also commissioned his portrait from Andrea Pozzo—Pascoli, II, p. 265. ’
41 am grateful to Count Orlando Buonaccorsi for making available to me what little material survives about his ancestor and to Mr Dwight Miller for letting me have copies of the photographs he had taken of the gallery and for suggesting many of the attributions. Some information about the family can be found in Silvio Ubaldi, and there are a few details about Raimondo himself in a small manuscript Memoria which was written by his wife in 1726 and still belongs to the family.
1 Amico Ricci, H, p. 436.
3 D. Miller, 1963 and 1964. -
4 De Dominici, IV, p. 428, who also mentions three other pictures painted by Solimena for the Buonaccorsi. Its arrival is recorded in a letter from Raimondo of 6 July 1714 in the family archives.
1 Zanotti, I, p. 305.
4 Lazzarini painted The Death of Dido and The Battle of Aeneas and Mezentius as well as other pictures for the family—da Canal, p. 38. —
8 Balcstra’s painting of‘una favola d'Enea’ for the Buonaccorsi is noted in the unpublished Use of the artist by Pascoli (Bib’.ioteca Augusta, Perugia—MS. 1383).
6 Zanotti, 11, p. 52.
7 This picture is now in the Pinacoteca Nazionale, Bologna.
8 D. Miller, 1958.
8 Amico Ricci, II, p. 436. When I visited the collection a few years ago, none of the pictures there could be attributed to Giaquinto, and d’Orsi (pp. 31-2) limits his work in Macerata to some very minor decoration in the window niches.
1 For this whole section see Haskell, 1956. This gives full references to the various manuscript sources in the libraries and archives of Lucca from which the material is taken.
1 In a letter of 17 February 1705 in the Biblioteca Governativa, Lucca—MS. 3299. For the full text of the relevant section see Appendix 3.
2 In a letter of 24 February 1705 in the Biblioteca Governativa, Lucca—MS. 3299. For the full text of the relevant section see Appendix 3.
3 Da Canal, pp. 40, 58, 59.
1 Biblioteca Governativa, Lucca—MS. 3299 and Zanotti, II, p. 62.
1 Zanotti, n, p. 50.
1 The remarkable series of letters from Alessandro Scarlattito Ferdinand are in the Archivio Mediceo.
2 Sgrilli.
3 For all this see Elogio del su Serenissimo Ferdinando de' Medici Principe di Toscana in Vol. XVH, 1714, of the Giornale de’ Letterati Italiani of which he himself had been patron; and also the letter from Scipione Maffei, dated 14 April 1710, No. 370, Filza $903 of the Archivio Mediceo.
4 Probably the lawyer Luca Ombrosi, writing in the middle of the eighteenth century—see Vita del Cran Principe Ferdinando di Toscana in the Biblioteca Grassoccia, Firenze 1887, p. 96.
1 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 411.
2 Now in the Pitri, No. 582. For its history see Giglioli, 1908, and Steinhart, 1936.
3 Now in the Pitri, No. 125. The copy was painted by Antonio Franchi—see Bartolozzi.
4 There is a certain amount of confusion about these pictures from Florentine and other churches— see Bencivenni and Jahn-Rusconi—but though slight discrepancies exist in the various accounts and in the sources, the general outline is clear enough.
5 See especially Hugford and Bartarelli.
6 For some general information on Cardinal Leopold’s collecting see [Bencivenni], I, pp. 248-61, and II, pp. 181-7.
1 See Fogolari, 1937—with special reference to Letters 22, 23, 26, 49, 59, 71, 74, 81, 91, 93 and 124.
2 See the letters from Ferdinand, dated 11 October and I December 1698 to the Duke of Parma, published by Emilio Robiony, and also Fogolari, 1937, Letter 28 of 9 January 1699.
3 Hugford, Bartolozzi and the Elogio as well as Fogolari, 193 7, Letter 45 of 16 May 1699.
4 Fogolari, 1937, Letter 45 of 16 May 1699.
1 Francesco Trevisani sent him the modello ofhis Banquet 0/ Anthony and Cleopatra painted for Cardinal Fabrizio Spada-Varallo—see MS. life of this artist by Pascoli in the Biblioteca Augusta, Perugia, MS. 1383.
8 Payments to other painters and sculptors in Florence are recorded in the Archivio Mediceo, Guardaroba 1055. The most interesting of these are Pietro Dandini and Giovanni Battista Foggini. Other very minor Tuscan artists also worked for him: Antonio Franchi has already been mentioned; for Francesco Botti, Giuseppe Pinacci, Romolo Panfi, Cristofano Monari, etc., see Abate Orazio Martini.
3 Fogolari, 1937, Letter 83 of 17 March 1703.
4 ibid., with special reference to Letters 6, 12, 28, 60 and 71.
5 Fogolari, 1937, publishes a letter from Loth of 14 August 1691 thanking the Prince for a present of oil and wine and telling him that he is about to embark on a copy of Titian’s St Peter Martyr. In 1693 he sent his self portrait to Florence. The Pitti contains a Death of Abel by him and six of his pictures are recorded in Ferdinand’s collection in the 1716 inventory—see p. 239, note 5, and also Fogolari, 1937, Letters 22 and 77. See catalogue entries in Ewald, 1965.
1 Fogolari, 1937, Letters 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 61 and 63 between May and November 1699..
2 This rather unusual subject is taken from II Samuel xxiv, 12.
3 The picture is recorded in the 1716 inventory—see p. 239, note 5. The subject, which is taken from IT Chronicles xxiv, 21, is wrongly described as The Punishment of the Prophet Ananias in the catalogue ' ' of La Pittura del Seicento a Venezia, 1959, p. 106. For another example of Ferdinand’s patronage of Fumiani see the curious letter written by him directly to the artist and published in Note 34 of Fogolari, 1937.
4 Ratti (see Soprani/Ratti, II, 14) refers to portraits by Cassana of the Grand Prince himself, his wife, his gentiluomo di camera and other courtiers including jesters, as well as his self-portrait and various history pictures. See also Fogolari, 1937, Letter 120 of 3 September 1707.
6 The Conspiracy of Catiline is probably a copy from Rosa and is now in the Pitti (No. in)—see Jahn-Rusconi, p. 238.
92 of 25 January 1704.
1 A Letter from the Grand Prince, dated 26 May 1702, (ibid.. Letter 75) says: ‘Mentre che scrivo è , qui [Livorno] da me Luca Giordano che ritorna da Napoli.’ The Abate Orazio Martini, Parte I, Vol. I, p. 38, says that on his return from Spain Luca Giordano ‘colorì varie pitture’ for Ferdinand in Florence.
2 Fogolari, 1937, Letters 98 and 99 of 30 August and 20 September 1704.
3 Some of these letters have been published by Fogolari, 1937. They show Ricci writing to Ferdinand of works by Livio Mehus, Ghisolfi, Lyss, Simon Vouet and others. -
4 Letter of 1 May 1706 in Archivio Mediceo, Filza 5903, No. 197: published in Appendix 4. In the exhibition of October 1706 (see p. 240, note 5) Orazio Marucelli exhibited a Flora by Sebastiano Ricci.
5 Letter of 8 May 1706—Archivio Mediceo Filza 5903, No. zoo—published in Appendix 4.
8 At the end of the eighteenth century T. G. Farsetti referred to the ceiling as follows—Fogolari, 1937, p. 186: ‘Nella camera de’ quadri veneziani, che il Principe Ferdinando ha formato al Poggio, e ch’ora è sfornita per essersi trasportati detti quadri in Galleria, ed in altri luoghi, si vede un soffitto dipinto in figure di due terzi, mirabile per l’invenzione e contrasto, come per il vago colorito, e buon disegno.
3 The Abate Gherardi, who in 1749 published an anonymous account of some of Consul Smith’s pictures in Venice. Writing of Ricci, he says (p. 73): . . . quivi [Florence] giunto che fu ed accoltovi benignamente intesi ch’ebbe i sentimenti di esso Gran Principe intorno la composizion dell’ideato lavoro pittoresco da fare: di tutto buon grado vi si appose secondando il genio dell’Altezza sua; ed avendolo con ispeditezza, bravura, e soddisfazion terminato, ebbe dal copioso pagamento e da i regali fattigli dare un manifesto riscontro della pienezza di gradimento di esso Gran Principe ...'.
2 The sketch for this fresco is now in the Orleans Museum.
3 Fogolari, 1937, Letter 106 of 3 April 1705. It is not clear whether the pictures in question were by Ricci or not. The 1716 inventory (see p. 239, note 5) describes an architectural painting by Saluzzi with figures by Sebastiano Ricci. This is now in the Pinacoteca at Lucca. It is initialled and dated 1706.
1 Letter of 26 February 1708—Archivio Mediceo, Filza 5904, No. 22—published in Appendix 4.
2 Crespi arrived with a letter of introduction—Archivio Mediceo, Filza 5897, No. 183—published in Appendix 4. The full story of how he came to give the Massacre of the Innocents to Ferdinand has been told by Zanotti, II, p. 46. It has subsequently been confirmed by documents—see catalogue of Mostra Celebration di Giuseppe M. Crespi, Bologna 1948, p. 29. The picture had been commissioned by a priest Don Carlo Silva to present to Ferdinand. When it was finished the priest defaulted on his obligations and announced that he had no further intention of giving it to the Grand Prince. It was then that Crespi decided to come in person to Livorno, where his arrival and welcome are colourfully described by Zanotti.
3 Crespi may possibly have been employed some years before the two men actually met. The Ecstasy of St Margaret, originally in S. Maria Nuova in Cortona and now in the Diocesan Museum there, was painted to replace Lanfranco’s picture of the same subject which Ferdinand bought for himself. It seems a much earlier work than the group of paintings by Crespi considered here, and it is mentioned earlier by his biographer, Zanotti, II, p. 44. See also the Mostra di Giuseppe M. Crespi, p. 29.
4 L. Crespi, p. 211.
1 Letters of March and April 1708 in the Archivio Mediceo, Filza 5904, Nos. 26, 38 and 357.
2 For the correspondence between Ferdinand and Ricci see Archivio Mediceo, Filza 5904, Nos. 167 anf 476. For the letters between Ferdinand and the Pepoli, ibid., Nos. 174, 489 and 490.
3 See the letter from Ferdinand published by Luigi Crespi, p. 203. The original draft is in the Archivio Mediceo, Filza 5904, No. 475. The Painter's Family is in the Uffizi, No. 5382.
4 These pictures are—or were in 1941—in the Gabinetto del R. Intendente di Finanza di Pisa—see Casini, pp. 42-50.
6 The picture is now in the Uffizi—see Zanotti, n, p. 55, and L. Crespi, p. 211.
8 A letter of 3 November 1709 (Archivio Mediceo, Filza 5904, No. 272) reports his return to Bologna.
1 L. Crespi, p. 211, says that he was in Florence for two years, whereas it has been shown that during - 1709 he was-there for eight months at most. On the other hand Zanotti, II, p. $4, implies that he went there several times. 2 See p. 237, note 1. —
3 Zanotti, II, pp. 52 and 54, and Letter from Ferdinand of 28 April 1708 in Archivio Medicco, Filza 5904, No. 3 57.
6 Inventario di Quadri, che si ritrovano negl'appartamenti del gran palazzo de Pitti di S.A.R., kept at the Soprintendenza alle Gallerie di Firenze. It can be dated between 1716 and 1723. For the sake of convenience I have referred to it as the 1716 Inventory. All the pictures from Ferdinand’s own collection are marked S.P.F.
250 pictures were shown, nearly all of them borrowed from the great collections of Florence, though none came from the Grand Duke’s. The pictures were hung in groups of about eight to ten in the lunettes of the cloister. As the visitor entered he turned to the right and, in the first lunette, he at once came across twelve pictures lent by Ferdinand himself, followed (above the door of the chapel) by a portrait of the Grand Prince
1 Fogolari, 1937, p. l6l, note 43, for Ricci acquiring works by Mehus for Ferdinand.
2 Hugford, p. 10. 3 Fogolari, 1937, Letter 12 of 7 June 1698.
4 ibid., Letter 120 of 3 September 1707.
5 The catalogue is called Nota de’ Quadri che sono esposti per la festa di S. Luca dagli accademici del disegno nella loro cappella posta nel Chiostro del Monastero de' Padri della SS. Nonziata di Firenze I’Anno 1706. In Firenze 1706.
1 Fogolari, 193 7, Letter 116 of 17 October 1705. The picture is now in the Pitti, No. 75.
2 The lender is not mentioned by name. But we know (p. 235, note 4, and Appendix 4) that Ferdinand had received two of Marco’s landscapes in May 1706, and it seems very likely that these were among those lent.
3 See the introduction to the 1767 exhibition: Il trionfo Jelle Bell'Arti renduto gloriosissimo sotto gli auspicj delle LL.AA.RR. Pietro Leopoldo Arciduca d'Austria . . . e Maria Luisa di Borbone.
4 Sgrilli, p. z.
6 Ferdinand’s patronage of contemporary Venetian art had at least one significant follower in eighteenth-century Florence: the Marchese Andrea Gerini, for whom sec F. Haskell in Boll, dei Musei Civici Veneziani, i960. Francesco Gabburri, the connoisssur of drawings, also kept in touch with Venetian artists, as can be seen from the many letters to him which are published by Bottari, Vol. II.