# CHP-8



--- [Page 1] ---

Chapter 8
THE PROVINCIAL SCENE
- i -
THE new world had helped to redress the balance of the old; but within Italy
itself patronage continued to be extensive. In all the leading cities it was looked
upon as the natural concomitant of wealth and power, and local schools of painting
flourished vigorously on the support that they received from the great noble families
and the religious orders. In Genoa a rich mercantile aristocracy dominated the Republic.
Its principal members, the Balbi and the Brignole, the Doria and Durazzo, the Imperial!,
Lomellini and Negroni, the Pallavicini, Saluzzi, Sauli and Spinola, filled their palaces
with the works of native painters, the occasional contemporary picture brought back
from Bologna, where the Legate or Vicelcgate was nearly always a Genoese, and a
selection of old masters.1 It was the same in Naples, where the feudal landowners of the
South, the Colonnas and the Maddalonis, the Monteleones, the Sonninos and the Tarsia
Spinellis, prospered under Spanish rule and gave lavish support to a school of art that
was second only to that of Rome in brilliance and diversity.2 And within the papal
states themselves Bologna, the second.capital, was ruled by senatorial families who
retained some semblance of autonomy—the Albergati and the Aldrovandi, the Ercolani
and Ghisilieri, Pepoli and Sampieri—and who built up vast collections of the works of
artists still basking in the reflected glory of the Carracci and their followers.3 And
similarly in Florence, Venice and other towns. Moreover, in each one of these cities
patrons from the professional classes were also of importance. In Bologna there were the
doctors: Paolo Battista Balbi, Beccari and the great - Marcello Malpighi all owned
pictures. Indeed the latter was a connoisseur of fine and decided tastes (‘quel abito
gesuitico fa melanconia’, he wrote of a S. Luigi Gonzaga' by Guido Reni), the friend of
artists such as Guercino and Cignani and a keen collector.4 And above all there were the
merchants who, at the end of the century especially, played a very influential role in the
artistic life of the city. Giovanni Antonio Belloni, for instance, who gave splendid
hospitality to the exiled ‘James III’, owned large numbers of pictures by Giovan Gioseffo
dal Sole, Felice Torelli, Crespi and Gambarini, and he sent the last artist on a journey
to Rome5; and another businessman, Giovanni Battista Bellucci, also owned works by
Crespi and many more by dal Sole. But the most cultivated and interesting of this little
1 See Soprani, passim. 2 See de Dominici, passim, and Maresca di Serracapriola, p. 49.
3 See Malvasia and Zanotti, passim.
4 Ruffo, pp. 122-3.
• Zanotti, I, p. 389. The essential source for the collections of Belloni, Bellucci and, indeed, all the
Bolognese families is the manuscript B.109 in the Biblioteca Comunale, Bologna—Descrizione delle
Pitture eke ornano le Case de’ Cittadini della Cittd di Bologna—Opera di Marcello Oretti Bolognese.

--- [Page 2] ---

204 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
group of enlightened merchants was certainly Giovanni Ricci.1 He was a rich and
discriminating patron who showed a keen appreciation of many contemporary artists,
above all Burrini and the young Crespi. He soon realised that the latter’s imaginative
gifts were bound to stultify in the provincial atmosphere of Bologna and he sent him
on long visits to Venice and Central Italy to absorb a number of widely differing
influences which soon made themselves felt in the pictures that Crespi painted for him.2
Ricci also acted as a dealer for Crespi on unusual and altruistic terms: he agreed to buy
any of the painter’s work that became available and when he sold a picture he handed
over all the profits to him, ‘and it is certain’, as the artist’s biographer observed, ‘that
such noble and generous treatment which, as far as I know, is not given by anyone else,
was of enormous advantage to Crespi’.
In Naples the lawyers who played such a vital role in the cultural life of the city
were especially prominent in their support of the arts. Above all there was Giuseppe
Valletta, poet and arbiter of taste, friend of Shaftesbury and the patron of Luca Giordano
and Solimena.3
However, all these men—and there were countless more like them—crucial as their
support was for the very survival of painting in Italy, could not possibly create the
climate that had been established by families like the Barberini and their circle in Rome.
With the general collapse of Italy under foreign domination and, ironically enough,
with the peace that followed, all these cities with the possible exception of Venice
remained essentially provincial. Between about 1600 and 1670 Rome was in fact the
only ‘capital’ of Italy that could compete in prestige with the main towns in the nation
states of Europe. At the beginning of the eighteenth century the wars which engulfed
Italy, the vast increase in foreign travel, the decline of Spain, and then the reforms of
enlightened despots helped to revive the cosmopolitan importance of some of the Italian
city states. During most of the seventeenth century, however, the extravagant but
somewhat unimaginative nobility and professional classes certainly kept alive local
schools of painting of great value, but their isolation and the very vigour of individual
traditions inevitably led to a stagnation of taste. Whereas the great Roman collections
had included pictures by artists from all over Italy, and even Europe, and had thus
stimulated a wide range of appreciation and new combinations of artistic sensibility—
such as the classical-Venetian synthesis of Cassiano dal Pozzo and his circle—it was rare
_ in Bologna to find a picture by a contemporary Neapolitan painter, or in Genoa to find
one by a Venetian. Rare—but not impossible; for, in fact, stagnation was averted hot
only by foreign intervention (as has already been pointed out) but also by a few patrons
within Italy itself, either expatriates or citizens, who-looked beyond their native towns
and included within their collections works by foreign artists.
1 Zanotti, II, p. 3 5, and L. Crespi, pp. 204 and 244.
2 See especially The Marriage at Cana of about 1686, now in Chicago, which shows the impact of
Veronese and Barocci—van der Rohe, pp. 6-9.
3 De Dominici, IV, p. 141, and Bologna, pp. 181 and 203. Valletta used to help Luca Giordano with
his problems of iconography (de Dominici, IV, p. 196) and bought from another collector a number of
architectural paintings by Codazzi with figures by Cerquozzi and Micco Spadaro (ibid., Ill, p. 421).

--- [Page 3] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 205
By far the most important and influential of all such patrons was the Flemish
merchant Gaspar Roomer.1 He was born of a good family in Antwerp towards the end
of the sixteenth century and by 1634 he had already been long settled in Naples and was
the owner of an outstanding picture gallery. Some years later his activities as shipowner
and trader had won him a fortune valued at five million ducats. His ships ranged as far
afield as Scandinavia" and Egypt, but most of his business was carried on with his native
Low Countries. He lent money to the viceroys and even to the King of Spain, and in a
city where titles and the feudal virtues counted more than anywhere else in Italy this
rich foreign upstart entertained half the nobility—at first in his palace in Via Monteoliveto and later in the Palazzo della Stella or in one of his many country houses. The
strength ofliis religious convictions and his especial devotion to the Carmelites were
shown by spectacular donations to their churches and the entry of his only daughter
into one of their convents. During the revolt of Masaniello in 1647 Roomer naturally
found himself in some danger—but luckily for him the public memory of his past
generosity to some working men living near his palace, combined with his readiness to
bribe their present leaders, saved him from the fate which befell others less cautious or
less benevolent. He lived on, respected and successful, for another twenty-six years
(recovering from the plague in 1656) and died, a very old man, in 1674. He left behind
a vast fortune, most of which he bequeathed to charity, over 1500 paintings, which were
quickly dispersed, and the proverb ‘Do you take me for a Roomer?’ with which to
counter persistent borrowers.
Like many a Fleming devoted to the pleasures of life Roomer had a taste for the
grotesque, the dark and the cruel which the painters of Naples were well able to satisfy.
Over the years he collected a grim series of works by Ribera: The Drunken Silenus—
a gross, dirty, fat-paunched, androgynous travesty of the god of wine lying obscenely
across the picture attended by his goat-like fauns and a braying donkey, the very
embodiment of harsh stupidity (Plate 32a)2; there was too The Flaying of Marsyas, who
lies with his torn, naked limbs outstretched under Apollo’s knee like some parody of the
crucified body of St Peter while the satyrs gaze in anguish at his torments3; and Sandrart
recalled seeing a Cato ‘who lies in his own welling blood after committing suicide and
tears his intestines into pieces with his hands’.4
In fact, Roomer was especially fond of the Caravaggists: besides his seven Riberas,
he_owned three paintings each by Caracciolo, the young Massimo Stanzione and Carlo
1 Except where specifically mentioned, all the information given here about Gaspar Roomer comes
from the two excellent articles by Ceci and de Vaes (1925). These include quotations from and references
to all the available first-hand sources—Sandrart, Capaccio, Celano, de Dominici, etc.
2 Although this painting now at Capodimonte is dated 1626 it is not referred to in Capaccio’s list
of the pictures in Roomer’s house in 1634; but Palomino (III, p. 311) describes it and says that it was
painted for him. SeeTrapier, p. 36.
3 The picture of this subject now in the Museo di S. Martino, on which this description is based,
cannot be the actual one owned by Roomer as it is dated 1637 and Capaccio refers to a painting of the
subject as being in his house in 1634—Trapier, p. 133, and Ville sur-Yllon, p. 147.
4 Trapier, p. 230. There is also a print by Sebastiano Marcotti of St Januatius by Ribera, dated 1665
and dedicated to Roomer *. . . affetti:mo della pittura e divot:o del Santo . ..'

--- [Page 4] ---

206 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
Saraceni; and he also acquired pictures by the Frenchmen Valentin and Simon Vouet
and the Dutch David de Haen. War, too, appealed to him when it could be looked at
safely as a picturesque muddle and required no active participation—his narrow escape
from Masaniello surely confirmed the advantages of non-commitment—and he was
particularly fond of the young Aniello Falcone who painted for him a number of lively
‘battle scenes without a hero’.1 -
But, above all, Roomer liked the small landscapes and storms at sea, the animals
and still Eves with fruit and game piling up on the table, that were the special subjects
of his native Flemish painters, many of whom settled for a time in Rome. He was
particularly proud of these—‘as all the pictures are very sine’, he wrote, ‘and as most of
them are by foreign artists, unfamiliar to Neapolitan painters, I want foreign painters
to be summoned to draw up the inventory; especially the painter Jan Vandeneynde of
Brussels and others whom he chooses’—and he owned several hundreds by Paul Brill,
Peter de Witte, Velvet Breughel, Leonard Bramer, Jacques Duyvelant, Cornelius
Poelenburgh, Corneille Schut, Gioffredo Wals, Gerard van dor Bos and many others.
Images of plenty and wild fertility, the landscapes and produce of his distant birthplace
mingled with the cruelty and lusts of his adopted home. What was missing was just
what was most characteristic of Roman painting at the time: the clarity and serenity
which classical discipline had imposed on Venetian colour. It is perhaps characteristic
of Roomer’s lack of intellectual interests that almost the only old masters in his collection
were eight animal pieces by Bassano.
Such was Roomer’s gallery in his early days in Naples-—thereafter, although he
went on buying hundreds of pictures, we have much less information about their
nature, and have to rely on a variety of indirect sources. We know that all this time he
was keenly trading in pictures as well as in other goods—sending Neapolitan paintings
to the Low Countries (notably those of Ribera’s pupil, Bartolommeo Passante) and,
presumably, receiving in exchange works by his fellow-countrymen, though his two
Van Dycks—a Susanna and the Elders and a St Sebastian—were probably acquired
locally. In about 1640 one of the most important of all his pictures reached his palace—
Rubens’s large Feast of Herod, a work of the artist’s full maturity painted probably
some half a dozen years earlier (Plate 35b).2 It caused a great impact in Naples, for it
was quite unlike anything that had hitherto been seen in Roomer’s gallery. The feast
_ takes place in a crowded, stifling room full of luxury and extravagance while richly
dressed guests, a boy with a monkey and negro servants all look on. In the foreground
a tall, blowsy girl holds the severed head of John the Baptist on a silver plate, and the
daughter of Herodias, with a strange, flirtatious expression, makes ready to stab the
offending tongue with a fork—a touch of cruelty that must have appealed to Roomer.
Only Herod, seated at the head of the table, with his chin cupped in his hand, looks
anxiously aware that a terrible injustice has been done.
1 For Falcone’s relations with Roomer, see Saxl, p. 80.
2 For the history of this picture, now in the National Gallery of Scotland, see L. Burchard, pp. 383—
387.

--- [Page 5] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE
207
The pageantry and colour of Rubens’s great picture may either have stimulated
or coincided with a certain taste on Roomer’s part for paintings less ‘realistic’ in subject­
matter or treatment than those that had hitherto formed the bulk of his collection. It
seems probable that through his Flemish agents in P«ome and elsewhere he commis­
sioned and bought pictures from Guercino, Giacinto Brandi (who painted an altarpiece
for his private chapel dedicated to S. Maria Maddalena dei Pazzi) and Sacchi; he was,
however, just as keen to obtain works by the animal specialist Castiglione and by
bamboccianti and battle painters such as Pieter van Laer, Jan Miel and Borgognone.1 And
during the last ten years of his life he made strenuous efforts to acquire architectural
scenes by Viviano Codazzi.
When Mattia Preti returned to Naples in 1656 Roomer commissioned a picture
from him and left the subject to the artist, who chose the Marriage Feast at Cana: it was
a rich, colourful scene set in an open loggia which deliberately looked back to Veronese.
The picture attracted attention in Naples, but Roomer himself seems to have acquired
further works by Preti only to export them.
Roomer’s relations with Luca Giordano, who was some forty years younger than
himself, began in the middle 1650s on an uneasy note. . The painter resented ‘being
treated as a beginner’, and apparently forged a number of old masters both to prove his
’ virtuosity and to tease the ageing collector. He was forgiven and thereafter Roomer
became his staunch supporter in the many envious feuds which the prodigiously success­
ful artist inspired. Unfortunately it is impossible to tell what pictures Giordano painted
for him. Were they in the new, light, rich, Venetian manner that the artist was already
practising long before Roomer’s death in 1674, or did they carry on for him the tradi­
tion of violence which he had so fostered in the early years of his collecting?
In fact our scanty knowledge of Roomer’s patronage during the last forty years of
his Use makes it very difficult for us to understand his place in Neapolitan culture. It was
unquestionably of great importance. He was held to be the richest man in Naples and
his collection of pictures was certainly the largest in the city. Above all it was permanent
—for the Spanish viceroys, the only rivals to Roomer in the claims they made on
painters, were always changing. ‘All picture lovers of the day followed his advice’,
wrote de Dominici more than fifty years after Roomer’s death.2 But what was his
advice? From the same source—our only one-—we hear of him praising Mattia Preti
- on their first meeting for his ‘maniera grande which was firmly based on drawing, on
nature and on chiaroscuro’. Can it be that he was disappointed in the ‘Venetian’ picture
1 When Roomer died he left seventy of his pictures to Ferdinand van den Einden, the son of his
business associate Jan. Van den Einden, who himself had a fine collection, imturn left a third of his pictures
to each of his three daughters. One of these married Don Giuliano Colonna, and in 1688 the inventory of
their collection was drawn up by Luca Giordano (Ferdinando Colonna, pp. 29-32). There are good—but
not conclusive—grounds for believing that many of these paintings must have come from Van den Einden
—and originally from Roomer. Indeed we know that the two pictures by Codazzi with figures by Micco
Spadaro of The Pool of Bethesda and The Woman taken in Adultery did pass through the three collections
in just this way (de Dominici, III, pp. 421-2). Unfortunately evidence as regards other pictures in the
Colonna collection is lacking, and I cannot accept Vaes’s certainty about their provenance.
2 De Dominici, IV, p. 47.

--- [Page 6] ---

2O8 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
which Prcti then painted for him and that because of this he thereafter commissioned
nothing for himself from the artist? We" know too little to say, but it is interesting that
he chided Luca Giordano ‘for his new manner which was contrary to those of good
artists’.1 Did this new manner He in the loose brushstrokes and lighter tonahty adopted
by the painter which offended other connoisseurs also? Roomer’s rebuke was certainly
not in the name of classicism—for we hear that he later backed Giordano against
Francesco di Maria ‘who was a great draughtsman but a weak colourist’. In fact, it was
naturalism that seems to have been Roomer’s greatest love from his earliest days when
his gallery contained little else until the end of his life when he was so keen to acquire
works by Codazzi,2 when Jean-Baptiste de Wael dedicated to him a set of prints
showing scenes from peasant Use,3 and when he was in touch with Ruoppolo, whose
still lives he sent to Flanders.
His gallery crystafosed that close relationship which had for so long existed between
the cultures of the South and North of Europe. The Flemish still Eves must have excited
many of the Neapolitan painters in this genre who would otherwise have had little
chance to see such work—and they repaid their debt with pictures of superb quality;
and Rubens’s Feast of Herod was certainly a source of inspiration to many artists breaking
away from the Caravaggism of the early years of the century, whatever Roomer himself
may have felt about the trend. ‘The magic of its brilliant colouring laid on with such
mastery’ profoundly affected Bernardo CavaUino, we learn from de Dominici, and
many other painters also studied this seminal picture.4
Closely associated with Roomer as patron were his business partners Jan and
Ferdinand van den Einden. Jan van den Einden was also Flemish though, unlike Roomer,
his origins seem to have been lowly.5 After some early struggles his partnership with
Roomer which began in the 1630s led to his enrichment, and his fortune was inherited
by his son Ferdinand, who was thus able to buy himself the title of Marquis and to
acquire a vast collection of pictures. His taste seems to have been largely modelled on
that of Gaspar Roomer, seventy of whose pictures he inherited. But, being of a younger
generation, it was the later painters, inspired by the Venetians, whom he specially
patronised. Thus he was so struck by Mattia Preti’s Marriage at Cana and the general
approval it met with that he ordered several very large pictures by that artist. But the
subjects of three of these, The Crucifixion of St Peter, The Beheading of St Paul and The
Martyrdom of St Bartholomew, show that Van den Einden must have shared Roomer’s
taste for brutal realism.8 He was also a keen admirer of Luca Giordano,7 but unfortun­
ately we do not know which pictures by that artist he possessed.
1 De Dominici, IV, p. 131: ‘gli fece una lunga esortazione a lasciar la nuova maniera, la quale dicea
esser contra rune quelle usate da’ valentuomini . . .'.
2 Ruffo, p. 176.
3 Bartsch, V, pp. 5-10. There is a set tn the British Museum.
4 For the influence of this picture see Bologna, p. 20.
5 Vaes, 1925, p. 185.
6 De Dominici, IV, pp. 48-9.
7 ibid, p. 140.

--- [Page 7] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 209
There was another exceptionally far-ranging patron living in South Italy at this
time. Don Antonio Ruffo was born in Messina in 1610 of one of the great aristocratic
families.1 This did not prevent him engaging in trade, and his income was still further
increased by the vast revenues he drew from taxes on grain, silk and other vital goods.
He played a limited part in what little political activity was permitted the nobility under
Spanish rule, and in 1661 he was outlawed for a short time for supporting the privileges
of his native city against the authority of the Viceroy. But most of his Use was devoted
to patronage of the arts and his palace in Messina became the centre of cultural life
there until his death in 1678. At that time it contained more than 350 pictures painted
by artists all over Italy and even elsewhere.
Ruffo began collecting in about 1646 shortly after moving into the palace in the
Strada Emnianuela which his mother, the Duchess of Bagnara, had built for him. He
continued almost without interruption for the next thirty years. A good deal of evidence
makes it clear beyond doubt that he took a great personal interest in the works that he
ordered, and yet it is an astonishing fact that his acquaintance with any paintings other
than his own must have been negligible. He seems never to have travelled beyond
Calabria, and he heard about the leading painters in Italy and elsewhere entirely through
agents. Everyone was pressed into acting for him in this capacity: his family, his friends,
the artists he employed and picture dealers. From them he was informed who were the
more talented artists at work—for he was primarily interested in his contemporaries—
and what was the state of the market. He then wrote to the artists directly or through his
agents to order the pictures he required, sometimes with instructions as to the subject, at
others leaving the painter a free hand. He was guided by two considerations: size and
expense. His pictures were arranged according to a symmetrical pattern, and he was
often anxious to make up pairs—either from the same artist or two different ones,
and this concern naturally involved the actual composition. Thus Guercino asked for a
rough drawing of Rembrandt’s Aristotle contemplating the Bust of Homer (now in the
Metropolitan Museum, New York) which his own picture was required to match. In
general, Ruffo seems to have decided in advance the price he wished to pay for each
work, and this too affected the structure of the pictures painted for him. As Guercino,
for instance, had a fixed rate of 125 ducats for each figure, when Ruffo offered him a
hundred scudi for a picture, the artist wrote that he would be prepared to paint ‘a little
more than halfa figure’. Later Ruffo raised the sum to 100 ducats, and Guercino answered
that he would ‘paint something to your satisfaction proportionate to the amount of
money that you are offering-me’.
When the first picture by an artist reached Ruffo in Messina he could decide
whether he wanted more by the same man; and in the absence of his own letters and
instructions, the number of works by each painter in his gallery helps to give us some
clues as to his taste. Above all he was obviously trying to amass a representative collection
1 For all this section see the admirable and fully documented account by Vincenzo Russo. For Russo’s
relations with Rembrandt see also Slivc, pp. 59 ff.

--- [Page 8] ---

210 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
of works by all the leading contemporaries—‘non si può dire infermità il desiderate
quadri di Pittori famosi’, his agent wrote to him—and it was probably this motive
that led him to make his most remarkable and magnificent purchases, the three pictures
by Rembrandt—Aristotle contemplating the Bust of Homer (Plate 35a), Alexander the Great
and The Blind Homer—bought over a period of a dozen years. Rembrandt was fairly
well known but not widely appreciated in Italy (except for his etchings), and Russo’s
Flemish agent in Rome Abram Breughel was probably not being insincere (as has been
suggested) when he wrote in 1665 that ‘the pictures of Rembrandt are not very highly
thought of here’. Indeed Russo himself found the free brush strokes of the great master’s
last period unacceptable and sent back The Blind Homer ‘to be completed’. Despite this
it is obvious that he greatly admired Rembrandt, and that he was comparatively
unaffected by the classicist doctrines that gained such force in Rome during the second
half of the-seventeenth century. He deliberately asked Guercino to paint the picture "
which was to match Rembrandt’s Aristotle in his ‘prima maniera gagliarda’, and
although this was for a particular purpose, at other times too he made special efforts to
obtain examples of this artist’s early and more robust style. Guercino, indeed, seems to
have been among his favourites for he owned seven of his pictures compared to only
one each by Sacchi and Maratta. Salvator Rosa, Giacinto Brandi and Michelangelo
Cerquozzi were others among those working in Rome who especially appealed to him,
but naturally the Neapolitans and South Italians were those best represented in his
gallery—seven pictures by Novelli, twelve each by Ribera and Andrea Vaccaro and
nine by Stanzione, though most of these were inherited from his brother. Religious
subjects have a clear majority over all others, but he also collected flower pictures (more
than a dozen painted by his Flemish agent Abram Breughel alone), landscapes and other
themes of all kinds. Of old masters Russo showed a special interest in Polidoro da
Caravaggio; he. also owned a collection of prints which included 189 by Rembrandt.
The astonishing number of pictures he had assembled was gradually dispersed after his
death, and only a few of them can now be traced. But even in its heyday Russo’s gallery
must have been an isolated one, a stronghold of European culture in the backwater of
the crumbling Spanish empire, whose reputation undoubtedly stimulated those artists
who worked for him but which was of little significance in any wider context, though
Ruffo tried hard to obtain public commissions in Messina for Guercino and Mattia
Preti.
But Neapolitan painting spread far beyond the frontiers of the Spanish empire.
Indeed, one of the characteristics of this phase in Italian patronage, when the absolute
supremacy of Rome was being challenged in various provincial centres, is the inter­
national prestige acquired by Neapolitan artists. Even in Florence, a city as far removed
as any in Italy from the spirit and traditions of Naples, there existed patrons whose
enthusiastic appreciation of Neapolitan art was responsible for vitally important
commissions. The principal outpost of this appreciation was to be found in a fine house,
set in a beautiful garden with fountains and statues, in the Via Chiara near the church of
S. Maria Novella. It was inhabited by three brothers, Andrea, Lorenzo and Ottavio

--- [Page 9] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 2H
del Rosso, who were among the most notable collectors of their dayd They sprang from
a family of rich merchants which throughout the previous century had been laboriously
engaged in worming its way up to the centres of power and prestige. Money had
opened all the doors: first, Florentine citizenship and admission to the recently founded
chivalrous order of the Cavalieri di Santo Stefano; then a series of ingenious marriage
alliances with the best families; and, finally, as a logical development, an increasing
number of dignities and official posts. Andrea, the eldest of the brothers, who was born
in 1640, was at the age of 36 awarded the lucrative flour monopoly which he shared
with the slightly younger Lorenzo.2 Both men later became Senators, and Andrea
eventually died in Rome, where he frequently lent pictures to the exhibitions at S.
Salvatore in Lauro, as director-general of the papal postal services. Ottavio entered the
Church and became Bjshop of Volterra, where he lived in ‘concetto di straordinaria
bontà’;
In their earlier days the brothers clearly travelled a great deal, for among the
pictures recorded in their collection are ‘two modern ones on glass’ from Mainz and
two ‘by Albert Diirer bought by me in Cologne’. Inevitably, like Gaspar Roomer and
so many other businessmen, their trading and patronage were closely connected: we
hear of them sending Carlo Dolci’s little Flight into Egypt to Lord Exeter in England3
and another picture as far as Poland,
We can best appreciate the novelty of their patronage if we compare it with that
of their immediate forebears. In 1642, two years before his death, their grandfather
1 The main sources for the collection of the del Rosso brothers are the account given of it in 1677
by Cinelli and the complete inventory drawn up twelve years later by Andrea del Rosso himself published
in Gualandi, II, pp. 113-28. Both these documents provide a certain amount of incidental biographical
information. To supplement these I have drawn heavily on a number of published and manuscript sources
in Florentine archives and libraries. I am most grateful to Dottoressa Paola Zambelli of the Archivio di
Stato for her help. '
’ General information about the family and genealogies exist in the manuscript collections of Passerini
in the Biblioteca Nazionale—in particular, Passerini 19(25): Informazione sopra la Nobiltà della Famiglia del
Rosso di Firenze mandata a i SStri Falconieri di Roma, da me GiotBatta Dei, quest’anno 1747. There are also a
number of references drawn from a variety of sources in the Poligrafo Gargano in the same library.
Very brief accounts of the careers of Andrea and Ottavio are given by Giuseppe Manini and Salvino
Salvini. -
The wills of Lorenzo and Ottavio are in the Archivio di Stato—Protocolli del notaio Nicola Taddei,
24,253, Testamenti and Protocolli del notaio Niccolo Salvetti, Testamenti, 23,516—but they are of no great
interest and do not refer to pictures except for a bequest by Lorenzo to ‘Priore Coriolano Montemagni
Segretario di Stato di S.A.R. di un Quadro di mano del Caravaggio di Larghezza braccia due con l’orna­
mento, et Altezza braccia uno, e due terzi incirca dipintovi fra l’altro S. Gio. Decollato.’
Andrea’s artistic activities in Rome are referred to in Giuseppe Ghezzi’s notes (see p. 125, note 1)
and'ih two letters from Sebastiano Resta to Francesco Gabburri published by Bottari, II, pp. 100 and 104.
Ottavio died in 1714, Andrea in 1715 and Lorenzo in 1719. The heirs were the two sons, Antonio
and Giovanni Battista, of a fourth brother Nicola who died in 1710.
2 A copy of the decree conferring the Appalto Generale della rendita della Farine della Città, e Dominio
di Firenze for nine years as from I June 1676 is preserved in the Archivio di Stato—Miscellanea Medicea
533, Uffizio delle Farine, and some information about its functioning can be found elsewhere in the same
collection of documents.
8 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 500. This picture, which is still at Burghley, was exhibited in London in
i960—Italian Art and Britain, p. 24.

--- [Page 10] ---

212 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
Andrea had had built in the Theatine church of S. Gaetano a sumptuous family chapel
dedicated to his name-saint. This was decorated with frescoes by Ottavio Vannini,
who himself died a year later leaving the altar picture to be completed by a pupil.1
Vannini was, indeed, the family painter: the four large scenes from the Old Testament—
The Sacrifice of Isaac, The Fall of Manna, Moses striking the Rock and Susanna and
the Elders—which he produced for the house were considered his finest works,2 and the
del Rosso also owned a large number of other pictures by him, mainly of saints. He
was a methodical, correct, academic artist in the true tradition of Florentine ‘disegno’—
characteristic in every way of the provincial backwater into which one section of that
city’s painting had sunk during the first half of the seventeenth century.
It was into this peaceful, somewhat pietistic household—Carlo Dolci also painted
for the del Rosso family3—that the new generation introduced over a hundred Nea­
politan pictures (some acquired from the Roomer collection after its dispersal in 1674),
of which more than sixty were by Luca Giordano. Aesthetic taste alone is unlikely to
have caused such a spectacular departure from traditional patterns; business connections
were probably of greater importance. Indeed, various links with Naples turn up from
time to time in the family history. In 1613, for instance, we find the Grand Duke of
Tuscany writing to the Spanish Viceroy about some subjects of his, ‘the sons and heirs '
of Antonio del Rosso, Florentines, but living and trading in Naples’,4 and it is perfectly
possible that Andrea and Lorenzo themselves may have started their careers in that city.
But however the connection began, it led to striking results.
Luca Giordano was their principal artistic agent in Naples and their relationship
with him was particularly close. Many of their pictures were acquired through him,
and when he came to Florence in 1679 he stayed at their house.5 Indeed, as they already
owned a number of his works before then, it may well have been they who arranged
for him to be given .the commission to paint the Corsini chapel in the Carmine, which
in turn led to his great frescoes in the Palazzo Riccardi. Certainly they owned the
original bozzetto for one of the pendentives in the chapel.
Luca Giordano’s paintings for the brothers were of various kinds and included a
large number of erotic works—many versions of the theme of Venus and Amor, one
1 Richa, III, p. 215.
2 Cinelli, p. 163, and Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 145. Two of the pictures—The Fäll of Manna and
Moses striking the Rock—are published by R. Longhi, 1956, in an article on the del Rosso collection.
3 They owned three pictures by Carlo Dolci—including the Flight into Egypt sold to Lord Exeter—
and four by Giovanni Bilivert. All these were of religious subjects. They also owned altarpieces by Pietro
da Cortona and Ciro Ferri. Pietro da Cortona’s Madonna and Four Saints—a smaller version of the early
picture in S. Agostino, Cortona—was obtained for them in-Naples by Luca Giordano—Gualandi, II,
p. 122, and Mostra di Pietro da Cortona, p. 28.
4 Biblioteca Nazionale, Florence—Poligrafo Gargano.
5 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 506. Senator Francesco Panciatichi, who from 1682 held the important
post of Primo Segretario, was the father-in-law of Nicola del Rosso, the fourth brother. In the Archivio
Mediceo (Filza 4123) is a letter to him from Naples, dated 2 April 1686: ‘Molto obbligantemente resto
da V.S.IlLma favorito nel particolare della lettera del Sig.r V.Re diretta al Pittore Giordani, mentre
oltre la briga presasi di fargliela sicuramente recapitare, s’è degnata anche d’assumersi il pensiero deviar­
mene la risposta, che già da me è stata presentata à S.E.*

--- [Page 11] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 213
os which showed in the distance an ‘ignudo in atto assai lussurioso che si strugge per lui’,
and sets of fables—Deianira and Nessus, Galatea and Tritons, The Rape of Proserpina. But
they also owned religious paintings by him with scenes from the Old and New Testa­
ments, as well as more purely devotional pictures; and they showed a particular fondness
for Giordano’s modelli for altarpieces and other works.
This new appreciation of the sketchy, the unfinished, lively brush stroke, which
was to be so important in eighteenth-century art and was to have another great Floren­
tine devotee in the Grand Prince Ferdinand de’ Medici, may have led to their collecting
(through the intervention of Luca Giordano) the work of another artist of the Nea­
politan school who has acquired enormous popularity in our own day. This was the
Frenchman François Nome, generally known as ‘Monsù Desiderio’, and described in
their inventory as ‘Lorenese’. They owned eleven of his mannered, visionary ruin
pictures ‘fatta di colpi’, including a Babylon, an ‘antichità di palazzi’, a ‘gran Tempio
antico’, a Temple of Solomon and an imaginary view of Venice. And the same taste for
the Mannerist is shown in their possession of what was apparently the original plate for
Callot’s print of La Fiera dellTmpruneta.
As an isolated phenomenon the del Rosso collection with its great emphasis on
Naples and its total neglect of Rome is of outstanding interest.1 Whatever its motives,
their sudden conversion from the Florentine tradition of ‘disegno’ to the values of
‘colore’ was symptomatic of the most advanced international taste towards the end of
the seventeenth century on the verge of the great Venetian revival. But it is difficult to
assess how far the collection represented something more important—a direct and
influential contribution to the cultural life of Florence. If it was through del Rosso
that Luca Giordano was commissioned to decorate the Corsini chapel in the Carmine
and the ceiling of the Palazzo Riccardi, we can certainly claim such an influence for the
brothers. These works, though they had disappointingly little effect on Florentine
painting, were of crucial importance to central Italy, and in their own right they rank
among the masterpieces of the century. Yet there are aspects of the del Rosso brothers’
taste which are curiously puzzling. There was, for instance, in Florence only one artist
whose freshness and vitality could surely have satisfied the friends and patrons of Luca
Giordano. Yet Livio Mehus they largely ignored. In 1677 they owned three pictures
by him; twelve years later these had disappeared. Somewhere, at the back of the mind,
there persists the disturbing belief that their special patronage of Luca Giordano may
have Been dictated more by financial interests than by aesthetic taste.
The importance that Neapolitan painting had acquired all over Italy towards the
end of the seventeenth century is shown by the collections of other patrons who looked
beyond their native cities. Thus in Genoa the Marchese Girolamo Durazzo, a member
. of one of the leading patrician families which over the centuries had built up an extensive
collection of local art, turned not only to Bologna for many of his pictures (as was
1 Besides those mentioned, they also owned pictures by Ribera, Preti and Paceco de Rosa—the
latter are published by R. Longhi, 1956.

--- [Page 12] ---

PATRONS AND PAINTERS
214
usual enough),1 but also to Naples. Luca Giordano painted four canvases for the family
—one scene from Tasso (Sophronia and Olindo), one from Roman history (The Death
of Seneca), one from the Old Testament (Queen Jezebel torn to pieces by Dogs) and one
from mythology (Perseus and Andromeda).2 And, in about 1704, Francesco Solimena
added two further vast histories from the Old Testament-Judith with the Head of
Holofernes and Deborah and Barach.3 Pictures by the same two artists hung together in
one other important collection outside Naples, that of the Baglioni in Venice, a family
of rich publishers who early in the eighteenth century bought their way into the
nobility. They showed a great interest in Neapolitan art, for besides pictures by Mattia
Preti they owned several by Luca Giordano and two by Solimena—Jacob and Rebecca
and Rebecca and Eliezer4—whose influence on Pittoni and the young Tiepolo was
considerable.
- ii -
The patrons hitherto considered, though living outside Rome, where artists from all
over Italy and indeed Europe had congregated, were able in their own collections to
reflect some of the variety which had been the most attractive and influential feature
of Roman patronage. But all of them, with the exception of Don Antonio Russo, lived
in centres of great artistic traditions and achievement characterised by flourishing local
schools of painting. In most cases it was these local artists who provided the backbone of
their collections which were then reinforced with additions from elsewhere, usually
Naples. The difficulties facing a collector living in a city with no such tradition or local
school on which to fall back were more complex and led to more interesting results.
For in these cities the patron had to commission works of art almost exclusively from
outside his province, and this involved a freedom of choice that did not face collectors
in Bologna, Genoa or Naples. Thus it came about that some of the most interesting
collections of Italian art in the later seventeenth or early eighteenth centuries were to
be found in cities quite undistinguished for their native painters. It was in places like
Bergamo, Ferrara, Macerata and Lucca, far more even than in Rome, that the enter­
prising traveller of the time might have found hanging together pictures by the younger
painters from all over Italy—those men such as Crespi, Solimena, Sebastiano Ricci and
others who had declined to visit or to remain in Rome. Indeed, the most striking
1 They owned large historical pictures by Giovan GiosefFo dal SHe and Francesco Monti (Zanotti,
I, p. 299, and II, p. 120) and they summoned Giacomo Antonio Boni to decorate the rooms of their
palace with mythological frescoes—Zanotti, H, p. 231, and Soprani, H, pp. 376-80.
* De Dominici, IV, p. 188. -
8 ib d.. IV p. 428, and Bologna, pp. 89-90.
4 De Dominici, IV, pp. 87, 188 and 428, and Bologna, p. 164. Both Luca Giordano and Solimena
had a number of admirers in Venice. Besides the Labia, who are discussed separately in Chapter 9, the
Procuratore Canale, Flaminio Comer, the Giovanelli and the Widmann all owned pictures by one or
other of them—de Dominici, IV, p. 428, and the engravings of Pietro Monaco published in 1763, Nos.
42, 51 and 89. Early in the nineteenth century the French traveller Valéry (I, p. 342) said that the Palazzo
Contarini contained ‘quatre des meilleurs tableaux de Luc Giordano, parmi lesquels l’Enée emportant
son père Anchise.’ For Neapolitan artists in Rome see Mattia Loret.

--- [Page 13] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 215
aspect of these collections lies in their neglect of Roman painting. The classicising
doctrines and institutions that paralysed or boycotted so many of those painters who
actually went to Rome were not to be found in these out-of-the-way places, and a taste
could thus growup in them based on very different canons of appreciation. It is true that
these collections were probably not many—though they obviously must have been far
more than the few that are here recorded—but in at least one case they were highly
influential. Moreover, the history of their development shows us the mechanism of an
unusual type of patronage which is of great intrinsic interest and of some importance
in the demolition of Roman values.
Work on the church of Santa Maria Maggiore in Bergamo began in 1137, and
continued fitfully over the next few centuries.1 In 1355 Giovanni da Campione erected
the delicate but richly ornamented Gothic portico supported on two stone lions which
faces the Palazzo della Ragione, and a few years later he also built the rather more
restrained entrance to the south. The Renaissance brought further additions to this
essentially Romanesque structure. In 1425, after nearly three centuries, the campanile
was completed, and towards the end of the century a sacristy in the new Bramantesque
style made it still harder to appreciate the original plan. The successive modifications
of the interior were far more drastic. Traces of Gothic frescoes still remain, but from
the middle of the sixteenth century the whole decoration was changed. Altar paintings
by local and Venetian artists began to appear, and rich and heavy stucco ornamentation
crept over the interior of the dome which was planned by the Milanese architect
Francesco Maria Ricchini in 1612. Two years later the Bcrgamasque painter Giampaolo
Cavagna, helped by two other local artists, completed the decoration of the dome with
frescoes of angels and prophets.
Thus by the middle of the seventeenth century the interior must already have
presented a confusing spectacle with the spasmodic and incomplete decoration of several
very different periods competing for attention. It was in 1653 that the Consiglio del
Consorzio, the governors of the church, decided to embark on an extensive programme
of decoration, whose main purpose was to provide pictures for the central crossing of
the church. A committee was appointed ‘to order oil paintings in the manner that
should seem most suitable to their considered judgement’.2
The task was a vast one, and the problems that faced the committee were difficult.
- It was clear that there were no longer any Bergamasque artists of the calibre required
and that the commission would have to be given to a foreigner. Bergamo had been
ruled by Venice since 1430, but it lies only thirty miles from Milan. Its artistic culture
reflected those of the two cities with which it was so closely associated and it was
natural enough that the committee should once again look to them. Their relative
failure led to a complicated series of negotiations in towns all over Italy, and though
1 Pesenti.
2 Unless specially indicated, all die documents here are taken from the very full article by Angelo
Pinetti, 1916. The interpretation put on these documents is naturally my own, though it will be seen
that I have followed Pinetti closely. I am most grateful to Signorina Dora Coggiola of the Biblioteca
Cívica, Bergamo, for her great help.

--- [Page 14] ---

2l6 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
these led to no real masterpieces and few pictures of any great value they give the
historian an enthralling impression of the difficulties that faced a persistent patron in a
small town.
Their first choice fell on a Swiss artist, Cristoforo Storer, a pupil of the Milanese
Ercole Proccaccini, who had already had close contacts with leading families in Bergamo.
In February 1654 he was commissioned to paint one of the thirteen pictures to be
embedded in the stucco of the vault and lunettes above the cornice of the southern
transept. The subject given was The Levites, and though the picture was eventually
produced, the artist’s dilatoriness caused the first of the many long delays which the
committee had to suffer, so that by April 1655 they were considering changing their
original scheme and having the vault frescoed as a quicker alternative. Indeed a few
months later they sent two of their members to die country house of a local aristocrat
to look at some frescoes he had had painted there and to decide whether or not the
artist concerned would prove suitable for the church. However, they soon returned to
the original plan, and in 1656 they commissioned a Neapolitan painter, Pietro Magni,
who was then working for the Marquis of Mantua, to produce one picture for the site
as an experiment, with the possibility, should it prove satisfactory, of being given the
whole job. Evidently it did not—for when in January 1657 a Cremonese painter, Ottavio
Cocchi, offered on his own initiative to paint one of the pictures, his proposal was
accepted and he was subsequently asked to paint four more. It was clear that the
commission was an attractive one to comparatively minor artists.
Meanwhile in the same year the cominittee began looking around for a suitable
painter for one of the three very large canvases to be placed above the main doors of
the church. After a unanimous vote it was decided that the task should be given to
Guercino and a messenger was sent to him in Bologna. The subject chosen was The
Story of Esther, but a few months later this was changed to the Marriage at Cana. Guer­
cino, however, was already overwhelmed with commissions and this one seems to
have made no appeal to him. - .
The committee’s one attempt to move outside the limited range of local talent and
employ an artist of international fame had thus met with no success. They put as good
a face on this as they could and ‘tó the full satisfaction not just of the Magnifico Consiglio
del Consorzio but of the whole city’ they commissioned a Massacre of the Innocents, to
be placed in the right wall of the southern transept, from a Capuchin pupil of the
Veronese Brusasorci, Padre Massimo, a man who had already painted a number of altar
pictures in the Veneto. So pleased were they with the work—a vigorous and efficient
rehash of Paolo Veronese—that, with the promise-of lavish alms, they implored the
Capuchins to give temporary leave to Padre Massimo and allow him to settle in
Bergamo to paint further pictures. But this too came to nothing. Instead, other artists
from Milan and its surroundings were commissioned to paint The Killing of Sisera, The
Sacrifice of Isaac, facob’s Ladder and the Murder of Cain. By 1659 the first stage in the
decoration was complete.
The committee now turned to the vault of the northern transept, where thirteen

--- [Page 15] ---

Plate 33
a. Soumena: Dido and Aeneas
b. The gallery of the Palazzo Buonaccorsi, Macerata

--- [Page 16] ---

Plate 34 FOREIGN MASTERPIECES IN ITALIAN
SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY COLLECTIONS {see Plates 34 and 35)
Velasquez: Juan de Pareja

--- [Page 17] ---

r rare j 3
a. Rembrandt: Aristotle contemplating the Bust of Homer
h T2TTRKMQ’ 1^»<» V^^^<?1- r»i* W^T-r^zl

--- [Page 18] ---

Plate 36
)04-63
setalP
ees(
EGANORTAP
SIH
DNA
DNANIDREF
ECNIRP
DNARG
teliot
reh
ta
lriG
:ipserC
.M
.G
.b
dnanidreF
ecnirP
dnarG
:iccurteP
ocsecnarF
..

--- [Page 19] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 217
paintings were required to correspond to those in the south, as well as one on the inner
wall and two huge ones to be placed above the main North and South doors, in view of
Guercino’s reluctance to comply with their request. Whereas in the first stage of the
decoration they had looked primarily to Milan for artists they now turned instead to
their other traditional source—Venice. In 1660 a contract was signed with Pietro Liberi,
at that time the best known artist in the city and already a man with a European reputa­
tion. Liberi agreed to paint the entire sixteen pictures for 3 800 ducats and was paid the
first 500 as an advance guarantee. It must have seemed that Santa Maria Maggiore was
at last able to attract a considerable painter. Seven-months later, his first canvas—The
Flood—arrived in Bergamo. But the committee did not like it. A cold letter was sent
off to Liberi, complaining ‘that it does not satisfy us and in no way corresponds to the
promises that you made us, still less to what we expected. And so we require you to
re-do it in a praiseworthy manner that satisfies us—meanwhile you must stop work on
the other pictures which we commissioned and which you agreed to undertake, just as
we will stop the payments in conformity with the contract.’ It was a year before Liberi
arrived in Bergamo, and after he had repainted the picture as demanded, it was placed
above the South door, where it still is. He then returned to Venice to carry on with the
commission. This time he was more cautious and instead of completing the second
picture, The Last Judgement,he sent a sketch. This too was a total failure. The committee
found it ‘deficient in every respect’, and thereafter the contract with Liberi was can­
celled.
It is impossible, unfortunately, to know the reasons why Liberi’s canvases met with
such a hostile reception. It is perfectly true that he was a bad painter, but then so were
many of the other artists employed in S. Maria Maggiore who were none the less
greeted ‘with complete satisfaction’. It is more likely that there was some precise cause.
His free style must have seemed slipshod in the provinces—but stylistic problems of this
kind only very rarely troubled seventeenth-century clerical patrons, and in any case the
tone of their letter suggests some much greater offence. In fact it seems most probable
that Pietro Liberi, who was notorious for the extreme indecency of his highly erotic
nudes, had upset Bergamasque susceptibilities, unused as they were to the more sophisti­
cated tastes of Venice. No two subjects could have provided him with more welcome
opportunities than The Flood and The Last Judgement, and (from what we see of the
former even after the alterations) we can be sure that Liberi took full advantage of
them?'
With the failure of their attempts in Venice the committee were now compelled
to turn elsewhere. Ciro Ferri, the artist whom they chose to replace Pietro Liberi, was
the most faithful follower of Pietro da Cortona and was at this time in Florence com­
pleting his master’s frescoes in the Palazzo Pitti.1 He was asked to come at once to
Bergamo ‘to see where the pictures were to be painted, be given the measurements and
the subjects, and arrange the price’. He replied that he was unable to leave Florence for
the moment, but asked for all the necessary details to be sent to him so that he could at
1 See a number of letters published by Bottari, H, pp. 47-56, and III, pp. 352-4.

--- [Page 20] ---

218 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
once begin work on the sketches which he would then submit -for the committee’s
approval. This was agreed and after some months of delay, during which the relations
between artist and patrons rather cooled, Ciro Ferri finally arrived in Bergamo in
September 1665, and in December signed a contract to paint the sixteen pictures—partly -
in oil and partly in fresco. Everything at last seemed satisfactory. In private letters Ferri
wrote of his pleasure, though he admitted that the sites for the frescoes were rather too
small. On the other hand the large picture over the door was to represent the Crossing
of the Red Sea and this ‘is the grandest composition that I have ever done. On one side
I am painting the Hebrews who have already crossed and Moses raising his rod above
the sea.’ The whole task, wrote Ferri, would take some two and a half years. In fact, he
worked much quicker than he had expected. By May 1666 he had completed four of
the frescoes; and by November a further six—all of subjects taken from the Old Testa­
ment. But now the first signs of trouble became apparent: T ana working day and night
to get through quickly; for I’m so bored that I can’t stay any longer in this place.’ By
June 1667, however, eighteen months after his arrival, the business was nearly over. The
thirteen frescoed compartments were all complete—little more than mannered and
insipid variations on Pietro’s style—so was one of the large oil paintings, and he was
waiting to finish the other so that they could both be shown to the public together.
In September the storm broke. Once again the committee showed how rigorous was
their taste. They had doubts about the quality of the picture to be placed above the side
door adjoining the Colleoni chapel and they decided to consult expert opinion as to its
merits. Ciro Ferri, in a fit of rage at this insult, left Bergamo without completing his
contract.
Three pictures remained to be painted—two large ones for the North and West
doors and one, slightly smaller, for the inner wall of the North transept. The committee
were once again, in a dilemma as to whom to choose for them. Various artists proposed
themselves, and eventually the young Venetian, Antonio Zanchi, was accepted and
required to paint Moses striking the RockJ By now the committee were in a much more
wary frame of mind than they had been when engaging Ciro Ferri. Zanchi was to
get no payment for submitting his drawings; even if they were approved and if the
picture itself—which was to be painted in Bergamo—then turned out to be unsatis­
factory it would be returned to him without fee. If it was accepted, experts would
decide on the price. These terms were exceptionally hard and quite unlike those laid
down in a normal contract. Zanchi, however, was still young and only at the outset of
his extremely successful career. He agreed to everything, but on a visit to Bergamo to
inspect the site he asked, and was given, permission to paint the picture in Venice. There
the canvas was sent to him, followed by letters complaining of the delay and asking him
to hurry. In fact, it was completed within four months, and it took the cautious com­
mittee almost as long again to make up their minds about it. Eventually it was accepted
with obvious enthusiasm, for Zanchi was paid the considerable fee of 825 ducats,
which he well deserved in view of the oustanding merits of this dramatic and richly
1 Bottari, HI, pp. 355-6.

--- [Page 21] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 2IY
coloured picture in which the blues, reds and greens of the women’s costumes and the
muscular backs of the men romantically emerge from a tumultuous background.
For the picture of the Sacrifice of Noah to replace Ciro Ferri’s unsuccessful effort
above the door of the Colleoni chapel the committee decided in 1677, after a delay of
some years, to organise a competition. Three artists took part and submitted sketches:
Federico Cervelli of Milan, Pietro Negri of Venice, who had followed Zanchi in
painting for the Scuola di San Rocco a picture to commemorate the cessation of the
plague of 1630, and the Turinese Cavaliere Perugino, a protege of the King of Savoy.
This was won by Cervelli, who, after a visit to Bergamo to make certain alterations,
was paid 370 ducats.
The third of the large oil paintings—The Crossing of the Red Sea,1 the subject that
had so fascinated Ciro Ferri at the outset of his Bcrgamasque career—was entrusted in
1682 to the most distinguished painter that the committee were able to employ on their
ambitious venture—Luca Giordano. The artist was then at the height of his career in
Naples, and the picture which he sent them, with its warm glow of light bathing the
faithful who have just emerged from the dark-green tempestuous sea, justified their
great hopes. He was given a present of 100 setidi in addition to the 700 he had already
been promised, and was pressed, unsuccessfully, to undertake all the remaining decora­
tion of the church.
Fourteen more paintings were now required for the central nave and the usual
difficult negotiations were soon under way. In 1681 a painter from Como, Cristoforo
Tencala, was approached, but nothing was arranged. A year later a local artist Carlo
Ceresa submitted a tnodello, which was considered to be ‘very beautiful and precious’—
flattering words designed to conceal the fact that the committee had now set their target
much higher. Unfortunately their funds were unable to stand the strain. Carlo Cignani
of Bologna, at this time probably the most famous painter in Italy, asked for exorbitant
sums as well as all his expenses. He was obviously anxious to be given the commission,
for he arrived in Bergamo to press his claims. The committee were sorely tempted,
wavered, and suggested a compromise. But Cignani stuck to his position, and the plan
fell through. Luca Giordano, whose Crossing of the Red Sea had been such a success,
presented difficulties of much the same kind. He had first asked for 6000 ducats to paint
the ten frescoes and four oils, but under pressure agreed to reduce this to 5000, provided
that he himself, an assistant and a servant were given free board and lodging for as long
as they "should be required to stay in Bergamo.2 The committee could just manage these
conditions and a contract was signed—only to be ignored by the artist. One of the
attractions of asking Giordano in the first place was his legendary speed. Now as year
followed year, and letter after letter was met with conciliatory but evasive replies,
Giordano’s.success with all the courts of Italy and Europe was seen to be a real drawback.
Moreover, as time went by, his terms became stiffer and stiffer. Perhaps Cignani would
1 An anonymous article in Bergomum, 1947, pp. 60-1, has shown that the subject represented was in
fact the Hymn of Liberation after the Crossing.
2 Tassi, I, p. 265.

--- [Page 22] ---

220 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
prove more satisfactory after all. And so in 1692, when Giordano finally went to Spain,
ten years after their original approach, the committee turned to Cignani once again.
Much had happened in the meantime. He was now painting the cupola of Forlì
Cathedral, a work which he intended should rival Correggio’s at Parma. His pre­
occupation with vast expanses made him reluctant to engage on a reduced space, the
limitations of which had already disconcerted Ciro Ferri a quarter of a century earlier.
The smallness of the area available and the height of the bays would, he wrote in August
1692, make it impossible for him to paint the figures on such a scale that they would
appear natural when seen from below in view of the crowded scenes he had been
required to depict. ‘Above all, I find myself unable to undertake the work because the
pictures are to hang above a perpendicular wall and this means that the foreshortening
would have to be so excessive—especially in view of the not very wide expanse of the
church—that it would be impossible to correct the distorted effect.’
So the problem remained unsolved. In Rome meanwhile the Swiss painter Ludo­
vico David heard ‘from a colleague and friend of mine’ about the fourteen pictures
that were needed.1 Anxious to prove himself in ‘such a notable site’, he wrote giving
details of his career and offered to paint all the pictures within two and a half years at a
price of 3500 scudi—or alternatively to take a share of the scheme at a price to be agreed
with other artists. The committee, whose experiences over the last half-century had
understandably made them cautious, proposed instead that painters all over Italy should
paint three pictures each, entirely at their own expense, and that if these proved unsatis­
factory no payment at all would be made. David was indignant. Hitherto he had always
been paid at least a quarter of the agreed price in advance and the remainder immedi­
ately on completion of the work. T could not without shaming myself allow it to be
remembered by posterity that I had degraded my noble profession in this way.’ He
proposed instead a highly elaborate scheme: three of the subjects required should be
chosen and a price of 500 scudi offered for each. Then any two other painters and David
himself—after being paid a quarter in advance—should begin work and agree to com­
plete the picture within a year. At the end of this time they should submit their canvases
to a public exhibition in Rome so that each could see his rival’s work and the public
could make criticisms. The canvases should then be sent to painters’ guilds in Florence,
Bologna and Venice ‘which are thought to be the best in Italy after Rome, which in
this case must be excluded because of the risk of favouritism’. The artist who was
considered the best should then be given the remainder of the commission.
All this was much too complicated for the committee, which applied instead to a
Bolognese pupil of Cignani, Marcantonio Franceschini. His terms were, however, even
more expensive than his master’s or Luca Giordano’s had been, and though on hearing
of a potential rival he hurriedly brought them down, the committee had already turned
elsewhere.
To Naples, in fact—where a pupil of Luca Giordano, Niccolò Melanconici agreed
to paint an Abraham at his own expense as an experiment. The picture arrived quickly
1 Bonari, III, pp. 361-9.

--- [Page 23] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 221
and met with approval. It was arranged that Melanconici should be given the entire
commission for a fee of 4000 ducats, which was to include all his expenses for travel and
for board and lodging. The oils were painted in Naples, and then in June 1693 the artist
himself arrived in Bergamo to undertake the frescoes. The results were controversial, but
criticism, as the committee pointed out, ‘is unavoidable’. In any case a willing artist
working for a reasonable fee was too rare to be turned down, and Melanconici was
given a certain number of other pictures to paint in the church and allowed to append a
gigantic signature, easily visible to the naked eye, beneath the colourful, if slightly
academic, figure of David with the Head of Goliath. And so by 1695, some forty years
after the original proposals, the decoration was at last complete.1
The long-drawn-out and complicated manœuvres of the Governors of S. Maria
Maggiore in Bergamo to commission artists from all the schools of Italy for the decora­
tion of their church form by far the most ambitious (and the best documented) of such
ventures in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. No private patron had either the
resources or the available time to compete with this body. Yet in other small towns
there were men who were helping, on however modest a scale, to break the cultural
isolation of the Italian provinces. One such was Cardinal Tommaso Russo. He was
bom in Naples in 1663 of the same great southern family which had given birth to Don
Antonio in Messina.2 He entered the Church and in 1692 was made Vice-Legate in
Ravenna by Pope Innocent XII. He then served as Inquisitor in Malta and Nunzio in
Tuscany before becoming maestro de camera to the Pope. He was made Cardinal in 1706,
after which he returned to Ravenna as Legate for a short time before going to Ferrara,
with which his connection was particularly close. He remained there from 1710 as
Legate and from 1717 as Archbishop until 1738, except for six years in Bologna from
1721 to 1727. As an old man he then lived in Rome in a palace opposite the Trevi
Fountain which he bought from the Cibo family. He died there, aged 90, in 1753.
Even this brief outline of his career will show that Ruffo had plenty of opportuni­
ties for seeking works by most of the leading Italian artists with the notable exception of
those in Venice. And the very varied contents of his gallery testify to the width of his
tastes as well as to his enthusiasm. It was in Ferrara that he brought the collection
together, though we know that he would commission paintings in most of the towns
in which he resided.
The gallery was kept in the new Archbishop’s Palace which was built for him in
1710'by the Roman architect Tommaso Mattei. In the centre of this vast palace adjoin­
ing the Cathedral a white stone stairway leads up to the' piano nobile in two great
flights of steps which bend back on each other. At the halfway mark on the balustrade
stands a statue of Vigilance commissioned by Ruffo from the sculptor Andrea Ferrerio,
1 Another church in Bergamo which, early in the eighteenth century, employed leading painters in
several Italian towns was S. Paolo d’Argan. Among those who worked for it were G. M. Crespi in Bologna
and Lazzarini, Ricci, Balestra and others in Venice as well as some local artists in Bergamo itself—Angelo
Pinetti, 1920.
2 For the outlines of his career see Moroni, Vol. 69, pp. 215-16.

--- [Page 24] ---

222 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
a pupil os the Bolognese Giuseppe Mazza.1 The same artist designed the rich stucco
decoration of the staircase wall in" which were placed medallions of the six popes who
had in some way benefited the City of Ferrara or her Legate, culminating in Innocent
XII, Russo’s own patron. On the top floor was another medallion in full relief of the
reigning Pope, Clement XL On the ceiling of the staircase another Bolognese artist
•Vittorio Bigari, known primarily for his later architectural fantasies, painted a fresco
of the Catholic Religion, represented by the Papacy, presiding over the provinces of
Ravenna, Bologna and Ferrara shown symbolically in heroic dress—the three cities
where Russo had principally served. It was in this grandiose setting, carefully designed
by the Cardinal in collaboration with his architect and sculptor, that Russo kept a
collection of paintings which aroused the enthusiasm of his contemporaries and which
to us in retrospect still seems remarkably varied and impressive.
Russo owned a number of works attributed to the great Italianjmasters of the six­
teenth and seventeenth centuries—Giorgione, Titian, Bassano, Correggio, Raphael,
Parmigianino, Caravaggio, the Carracci, Guido Reni and Guercino as well as others
by Rubens and Van Dyck less familiar in Italian collections.2 John Breval on a visit to
Ferrara commented on some of these—‘four of the most capital Castigliones I remember
to have seen; an incomparable Lucretia by Hannibal Carache; and a very fine Original
of the famous Neapolitan Chief of the Mutineers, Masanella [sir]’.3 But the most
remarkable of all Russo’s seventeenth-century pictures must have been Velasquez’s
portrait of his servant Juan de Pareja, ‘cosa stupenda’, which in 1704 he sent to an
exhibition in Rome (Plate 34).*
The bulk of his modern pictures came from Bologna. Crespi was represented by
four works, two of which were commissioned during Russo’s legateship in the city:
Abigail giving Presenti to David and The Finding of Moses.5 Both these religious themes
are treated in a spirit of subdued and tender romanticism, and it was perhaps this quality
that Russo sound so congenial in Crespi’s more aristocratic counterpart in the depiction
of such subjects—Donato Creti. He was so fond of this painter that he used to sit
1 This account of the Archbishop’s palace, which is still today exactly as described, is taken from the
most tantalising document I came across during the course of my researches. It is a manuscript in the
Biblioteca Ariostea, Ferrara—Collezione Antonelli MS. 610—Calleria di Pitture raccolte, ed esposte nel
Palazzo Vescovale di Ferrara dall em.mo e rev.mo Sig.r Card.l Tommaso Ruffo Vescovo di detta Città, e Legato
a Latere di Bologna descritta da Girolamo Baruffaldi. After a long account of the palace comes the word
Galleria, only to be followed by the following sentence: ‘Ma il Card. Ruffo, annoiato, e malcontento dell’
Arcivescovado di Ferrara lo rassegnò al Sommo Pontefice, e se ne andò a Roma portando seco le
Pitture della sua Galleria, onde levò a me il contento, e l’onore di poterla più descrivere.*
2 The list of Russo’s pictures was published with verse commentaries by J. Agnelli.
3 Breval, 1738,1, p. 193.
* The picture ‘11 Ritratto da tre palmi rappresentante un servo che Ri serv.re del S.r Diego Velasquez
famoso pitt.re e cosa stupenda’ was among those lent to the exhibition in S. Salvatore in Lauro in 1704
—see p. 125, note 1. It is the picture now in the Metropolitan Museum which was in the collection of Sir
William Hamilton in Naples by 1798.
6 Both of these, together with other pictures from Ruffo’s collection, are now in the Museo di
Palazzo Venezia in Rome. They are referred to by Zanotti, II, p. 56, and L. Crespi, p. 214. See also
Santangelo, pp. 2 and 23.

--- [Page 25] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 223
watching him at work for hours and had him created Cavaliere dello speron d'oro.1
He owned at least two paintings by him of scenes from the life of Solomon and a Dance
of Nymphs described by the artist’s biographer as a capriccio pittoresco with twenty-four
figures. Russo commissioned religious paintings and histories by most of the other
leading Bolognese artists such as Carlo Cignani, Marcantonio Franceschini (after 1720)
and Giovan Gioseffo dal Sole and also two bambocciate by Giuseppe Gambarini.2
Despite a life spent almost entirely in the North, Ruffo remained closely attached
to his Neapolitan background. Luca Giordano sent him four pictures, of which one,
representing Hebrew Women singing after crossing the Red Sea, may well have been con­
nected with his work for S. Maria Maggiore in Bergamo; Solimena painted for him a
Nativity and a Presentation; and when he retired to Rome it was once again to his
compatriots that he turned. The rich chapel which Nicola Salvi built for him in S.
Lorenzo in Damaso was decorated by Sebastiano Cbnca and Corrado Giaquinto, the
former of whom also painted other pictures for him.3 Roman artists he found to be of
little interest and his gallery in the Palazzo Cibo must have retained its exotic and
delicate flavour until his death.
Another patron who during these years was ranging freely over Italy for his
pictures was Raimondo Buonaccorsi, who lived in the little Marchigian town of
Macerata. This provincial nobleman was born in 1669 of an old and important family
with extensive ramifications throughout the peninsula and a particularly close relation­
ship with the Church? In 1699 he married Francesca Bussi, who by 1726 had brought
eighteen children into the world, one of whom, Simone, was to become a Cardinal.
He died in 1743. Of his personality and achievements we know next to nothing. The
less than a handful of letters to and from him that can be traced suggest almost too
characteristic an image of the early eighteenth-century gentleman as transmitted to us
by subsequent writers—elaborately courteous, proud, and deeply attached to the
established powers. But also-ambitious with more than a touch of arrogance? Until
further evidence comes to light we must be content with this shadowy sketch: mean­
while we can see from the splendid decoration of his palace that he was also a patron
of great enterprise and interest. The palace—the finest in this little hill town in the
1 Zanotti, II, p. 115, and L. Crespi, p. 259.
- 2 Zanotti, I, p. 239.
3 De Dominici, IV, p. 538, and Moroni, XII, p. 71. He also commissioned his portrait from Andrea
Pozzo—Pascoli, II, p. 265. ’
41 am grateful to Count Orlando Buonaccorsi for making available to me what little material
survives about his ancestor and to Mr Dwight Miller for letting me have copies of the photographs he
had taken of the gallery and for suggesting many of the attributions. Some information about the family
can be found in Silvio Ubaldi, and there are a few details about Raimondo himself in a small manuscript
Memoria which was written by his wife in 1726 and still belongs to the family.
s The letters, which are oflittle interest, are in the Vatican Library—(i) From Raimondo Buonaccorsi
to Tiberio Cenci, dated 23 February 1705—Vat. Lat. 9041, c. 39; (ii) from Alessandro Borgia, Arcivescovo
e principe di Fermo, to Raimondo Buonaccorsi, dated 13 September 1737—Borg. Lat. 236, c. 87; (iii) as
(ii)—dated 7 December 1742, Borg. Lat. 236, c. 125.

--- [Page 26] ---

224 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
States of the Church—was being built for Raimondo during the first two decades of
the eighteenth century on the site of an earlier one which had been acquired in 1701 by
his father.1 The architect was the Roman Giovanni Battista Contini, and although work
continued for many years, by 1707 enough progress had been made for Raimondo
Buonaccorsi to begin the decoration of the long gallery. This survives intact today
(Plate 33b). The low barrel-vault is covered from end to end with a single fresco and
this alone gives some unity to the very varied decorative scheme that faces the visitor.
On each side of the gallery three windows open on to a courtyard and on to the front
of the palace, and the fight which streams in reveals the general richness—a profusion
of coloured marbles with elaborate wood and stucco ornamentation. Overriding every­
thing are the paintings. The whole surface is covered with huge square and rectangular
canvases which fit into all the wall space available between and above the doors and
windows. Each one is painted in a wholly different style: we find the blond, carefully
drawn figures of a Bolognese next to the darkly dramatic and rich swirling movement
of a Neapolitan or the confusion of a late Venetian. Yet it soon becomes clear that each
represents an episode taken from a single story—the Aeneid. It is such iconographie
unity combined with extreme stylistic diversity, rather than any intrinsic merit in the
canvases, which makes this decoration so exceptional in the Italy of its day.
In 1707 Raimondo Buonaccorsi summoned two Bolognese artists. Carlo Antonio
Rambaldi and Antonio Dardani, to paint the fresco of the Apotheosis of Aeneas on the
vault of his gallery,2 and soon afterwards he began to commission the pictures of single
episodes from the epic to be fitted into the walls. Rome, capital of the papal states in
which he lived, was the obvious place to which to turn, but for him, as for so many of
the livelier provincial patrons, Roman painting seems to have had little appeal and he
chose only one example for his gallery: a picture of Venus in the Forge of Vulcan, painted
apparently by Luigi Garzi.3 For the rest his attention was firmly concentrated on
Naples, Bologna and Venice.
The masterpiece of the whole series, Francesco Solimena’s Dido welcoming Aeneas
to the Royal Hunt, was among the first to arrive (Plate 33a).4 The tremendous implica­
tions of the theme—‘Ilie dies primus leti primusque malorum/Causa suit’—were
realised by the artist in a picture of the utmost romantic splendour. Dark clouds lower
over the landscape and, on the instructions of Juno, the winds prepare to pound the
earth with driving rain as the young Trojan hero, oblivious of Cupid’s arrow aimed
at his breast, hurries forward to accept the guiding hand of Dido, who looks back at
him with eyes full of tender passion. The picture aroused the greatest enthusiasm and
1 Amico Ricci, H, p. 436.
* Zanotti, L PP- 396 and 418.
3 D. Miller, 1963 and 1964. -
4 De Dominici, IV, p. 428, who also mentions three other pictures painted by Solimena for the
Buonaccorsi. Its arrival is recorded in a letter from Raimondo of 6 July 1714 in the family archives.
Bologna (Plate 209) publishes a replica in the Scholz-Forni collection, Hamburg.

--- [Page 27] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 225
interest. In Bologna Giovan Gioseffo dal Sole, who was working on his own. canvas of
Andromache weeping before Aeneas, heard of its arrival and insisted on coming to the
Buonaccorsi palace to see it.1 A Bolognese painter travelling across the hills to Macerata
to examine the latest masterpiece by his Neapolitan rival—here indeed was proof that
Rome was no longer the great centre of cultural exchange that it had once been!
Yet we must not claim too much for the gallery. Giuseppe Gambarini2 and
Marcantonio Franceschini in Bologna,3 Gregorio Lazzarini4 and Antonio Balestra in
Venice,5 all of whom turned out further scenes from the poem were not men from
whom anything very new could be expected. Their works have a clumsiness and a
lack of conviction which suggests that the tradition of large-scale romantic history
painting to which they harked back had been drained of vitality and was now little
more than an empty academic exercise.
Indeed it was in-some of the other rooms in Raimondo’s palace that works by the
more interesting and ‘modern’ painters of the day were to be found, and the striking
contrast between these and the men who painted the scenes from the Aeneid shows that
Raimondo must have had a genuine awareness of their essential qualities. Thus Crespi,
who was quite unsuited to heroic melodrama, was required to paint four fables,6 and
the one that has survived—Leto turning the Shepherds into Frogs—shows with what
engaging irony he could interpret the stories of classical mythology.7 The attitude of
Giuseppe Gambarini, who was also commissioned to paint pagan scenes, was rather
different: more placid and more sensual and with none of Crespi’s humour.8 But he too
was engaged in the characteristically eighteenth-century revolution of turning the great
themes of antiquity, and even Christianity, into pretexts for genre.
Apart from the works of these masters we have few records of the collection.
Little or no trace can be found of Corrado Giaquinto, who is reported to have worked
for the Buonaccorsi,9 for- the pictures were repeatedly split up among members of the
family and no inventory has survived. It is, however, possible to suggest that Raimondo
may have been among those many patrons of the dawning Age of the Enlightenment
whose great public galleries looked back resolutely to the past, but whose private
1 Zanotti, I, p. 305.
2D. Miller, 1963 and 1964.
" 3 -Franceschini painted Mercury awaking Aeneas—Zanotti, I, p. 236, and an entry in the artist’s Libra
dei Conti (Biblioteca Comunale, Bologna—MS. B.4067) which shows that he was paid 1000 lire.
4 Lazzarini painted The Death of Dido and The Battle of Aeneas and Mezentius as well as other pictures
for the family—da Canal, p. 38. —
8 Balcstra’s painting of‘una favola d'Enea’ for the Buonaccorsi is noted in the unpublished Use of the
artist by Pascoli (Bib’.ioteca Augusta, Perugia—MS. 1383).
6 Zanotti, 11, p. 52.
7 This picture is now in the Pinacoteca Nazionale, Bologna.
8 D. Miller, 1958.
8 Amico Ricci, II, p. 436. When I visited the collection a few years ago, none of the pictures there
could be attributed to Giaquinto, and d’Orsi (pp. 31-2) limits his work in Macerata to some very minor
decoration in the window niches.

--- [Page 28] ---

226 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
apartments were silled with smaller and more intimate pictures betraying a wholly new
range of sensibility.
On a much more modest scale we can notice a somewhat similar conflict in the
contemporary collection of Stefano Conti, a business man of Lucca.1 Though he owned
only ninety-^seven pictures, mostly of small dimensions, he too was forced by the very
nature of his birthplace to look far outside his native province for talented artists. He
confined himself to Bologna and Venice, and—partly by accident and partly by design
—lie managed in the process to acquire pictures by Crespi, Sebastiano Ricci, Canaletto
and other leading eighteenth-century painters.
Conti _was born in 1654 of a father who had been accepted into the Lucchese
nobility some quarter of a century earlier. He himself carried on a flourishing trade in
silks and cloth,, and we can see siom his will and other documents that he was an acute
man of business. He married in 1685, but outlived both his wife and only son and died
in 1739 at the age of 85. He began collecting quite suddenly at the end of 1704 after a
journey which had taken him to Venice and Bologna, and for the next three years he
methodically acquired a number of pictures in both cities in a spirit that suggests that
he knew exactly what he wanted and had no intention of letting himself be carried
away by any undue enthusiasm. He employed a local architect to construct a well-lit
gallery, silled it with the right number of pictures, refused to sell them when pressed,
and in his will tried to make sure that the collection should be preserved as a
whole.
His dealings with the painters themselves were equally precise. He was a generous
patron, but refused ever to pay more than he thought a picture was worth. He insisted
that each work should be an originals painted for him alone and not copied. Though he
allowed his artists complete freedom of choice as regards subject-matter, their pictures
had to conform to certain specified sizes. And every artist was required to send him a
written guarantee certifying the exact subject and date of his works.
When in Venice and Bologna—to which he subsequently returned on a number
of occasions—Stefano Conti went to the studios of some of the leading artists and drew
up his first commissions. At the same time he got in touch with a Veronese painter,
Alessandro Marchesini, from whom he at once ordered a number of pictures and whom
he appointed his agent. For this post Marchesini was ideally suitable despite his very
limited gifts. He lived in Venice, but had studied in the school of Carlo Cignani in
Bologna, siom which sprung all the leading artists in the city. He was thus in close
contact with everybody, and he carried out his job with keenness and efficiency—
pressing on those who showed signs of delay, writing regularly to his patron to keep
him informed, handing out the advance payments, suggesting new artists, and even
proposing alterations in the work of established masters.
Conti was apt to pay his artists according to the number of figures in each picture,
1 For this whole section see Haskell, 1956. This gives full references to the various manuscript sources
in the libraries and archives of Lucca from which the material is taken.

--- [Page 29] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 227
and this sometimes led to problems. ‘It is a little difficult’, wrote Marcantonio Frances­
chini from Bologna,1 ‘to find a history or fable with two figures and putti, and I would
like the gentleman himself to choose what he wants.’ However, he went on to propose
various subjects—sacred and profane at random: Adam and Eve, Bacchus and Ariadne
and so on, ending up that ‘what I would really like to do would be a fanciful pastoral
with a shepherd, a nymph and two or three putti in atto bizzarre e curio so . And the
suggestion was accepted. Other artists had more ambitious ideas. Also in Bologna,
Felice Torelli wanted to paint a scene from Trojan history2—‘Pyrrhus killing Polyxena
in the temple and there will be Chalchas, the soothsayer, and other half-length figures
or heads depicting Aeneas and Antinorus-—in fact everything that is needed for the
history, and also the tomb of Acliilles, the father of Pyrrhus.’ Conti was equally ready
to accept a picture of this kind, but when it eventually arrived he wrote to ask once more
what exactly it represented. -
The Venetian artists were on the whole less imaginative in their choice of subject—
stock scenes from the Bible and mythology were their usual standby; there is a definite
preponderance of religious painting, and evenLazzarini, who was so much admired for his
nudes, painted six subjects from the Old and New Testaments of impeccable morality.3
Conti’s gallery, when completed by about 1707, must have presented a notably
’ ‘academic’ appearance. The artists he had chosen—Marchesini himself, Lazzarini,
Balestra, Fumiani, Bellucci, Angiolo Trevisani, Segala, Dal Sole and Franceschini—
were all of his own generation and mostly adhered to ‘correct’ drawing and blond
tonality in opposition to the violent tenebrosi who had enjoyed such a success in Venice.
But his interests were not confined only to history painters. He had the portraits of his
wife, his son and himself painted by Sebastiano Bombelli, the leading portraitist in the
city—a local artist, Antonio Franchi, was considered good enough for his three daughters
—and he also commissioned seven pictures of fruit and animals from Giovanni Agostino
Cassana, a number of landscapes by other artists and three views of Venice by Luca
Carlevarijs. Busts of Diana and Endymion by the Bolognese Giuseppe Mazza completed
the gallery.
With all this Stefano Conti was satisfied for nearly twenty years, during which he
bought only three pictures—a ‘Correggio’ Christ in the Garden of Olives, a Guercino
Flight into Egypt and a Cain and Abel by the local artist Domenico Brugiori. Then in
- 1725, as suddenly as ever, he began to resume collecting. To Alessandro Marchesini’s
great delight, Conti turned once more to him for advice. Evidently some spare room
had been found, because Conti was trying to get two further views by Carlevarijs to
add to the three that he already owned, and one landscape by Francesco Bassi, il
Cremonese, to make a complete set of four. But in the previous twenty years the artistic
situation in Venice had been completely transformed. Carlevarijs, wrote Marchesini, was
1 In a letter of 17 February 1705 in the Biblioteca Governativa, Lucca—MS. 3299. For the full text
of the relevant section see Appendix 3.
2 In a letter of 24 February 1705 in the Biblioteca Governativa, Lucca—MS. 3299. For the full text
of the relevant section see Appendix 3.
3 Da Canal, pp. 40, 58, 59.

--- [Page 30] ---

228 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
old and il Cremonese was blind. Instead there was a ‘Sigr. Antonio Canale, who astounds
everyone who sees his work in this city—it is like that of Carlevarijs, but you can see
the sun shining in it’, and also ‘a remarkable landscape painter, whose works are in great
demand here and in London ... with a style very much of his own and a very perfected
manner. . . . Ricci is a marvellous painter at producing views and strange landscapes
with buildings in the style of Poussin, all in lively and brilliant colour, which enchants
those who look at them.’ And so, under constant pressure from Marchesini, Conti
commissioned his first two paintings by Canaletto and then, so pleased was he with the
result, another two, despite the artist’s difficult behaviour over money, and eventually
five little landscapes with ruins and figures by Marco Ricci. Marco’s uncle, Sebastiano,
inserted the figures in these, but when he was asked to paint on his own ‘two history
pictures with full-length figures of half natural size ... which must represent Alexander
the Great and must hang opposite two others by good Bolognese artists’, Ricci asked a
price which the cautious Conti found exorbitant, and the proposal came to nothing.
He did, however, buy a portrait by Rosalba Garriera of his daughter-in-law Emmanuela, and three years later, in 1728, he commissioned his last picture which was to be by
Crespi.1 Negotiations took place directly between the two men and began with some
difficulty when Crespi haughtily explained that he had always had correct written
contracts ‘from His Highness the late Grand Prince Ferdinand, from the late Pope, and
from Prince Eugene of Savoy in whose service I now am’. After this had been satis­
factorily settled he wrote at great length to describe the subject he had chosen, The Infant
Jupiter handed over by Cybele to the Corybantes to be fed (Plate 67), and enclosed a sketch
which was ‘to serve as an embryo’. However, when sending the painting itself in April
1729, he changed the title to The Finding of Moses, as sacred pictures paid lower customs
duty than profane ones!
This little group of pictures by Crespi, Canaletto, Marco and Sebastiano Ricci,
with their nervous brush strokes and dramatic contrasts of light and shade, must have
looked strangely isolated in Conti’s collection of essentially old-fashioned paintings,
and he did nothing to increase their number. His taste was never very adventurous and
his greatest interest was apparently to fill his gallery with accredited works. Like many
of the other patrons who lived in small towns and ordered pictures from elsewhere, he
had no chance to see the paintings he had commissioned until they reached him in
Lucca. This was, indeed, the limitation of most of these provincial collections. Pictures
from Bologna, Venice, Naples and even Rome might hang together and enrich local
taste, but the artists themselves remained isolated both from each other and from the
guidance of a cultivated patron. There was, however, one very significant exception to
this general state of affairs.
-iiiThe most important figure in this strange interregnum of Italian art when any over­
riding sense of direction seemed to have been lost was, appropriately enough, a Medici.
1 Biblioteca Governativa, Lucca—MS. 3299 and Zanotti, II, p. 62.

--- [Page 31] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 229
For a few years Florence once more became the most interesting city in Italy before
sinking into utter provincialism. In the Grand Prince Ferdinand who was responsible
for this short-lived but profoundly important revival we can see, as in no other single
figure, the tastes of the seventeenth century changing into those of the eighteenth, and
this alone makes him worthy of the closest to study (Plate 36a). But his significance is
greater than that. As a Medici he bore a name that still carries its own magic. And he
was a munificent patron when the race seemed to have died out—‘the only support of all
the sine arts in Italy’, wrote a contemporary.1 His individual tastes were thus of consider­
able importance for the development of painting.
He was born in 1663, the son of Cosimo III and Marguerite d’Orléans.2 The
tempestuous relationship between his parents—his mother, unable to stand the suffocat­
ing atmosphere of Florence, left in 1675 for the freedom of a convent in Montmartre
which placed few obstacles in the way of her volatile appetites—and the bigoted
pomposity of Cosimo himself left its mark on the two sons of the marriage: Ferdinand,
who died at 50 before ruling, and Gian Gastone, the last of the Medici princes. Both
were highly intelligent, but both had a streak of instability which in Gian Gastone
eventually led to paralysing debauchery. Ferdinand was educated by all the most
remarkable personalities in a city that was still notable in the intellectual Europe of the
day—Viviani, Lorenzini, Redi. He became a highly cultivated and accomplished figure,
handsome, good humoured, an excellent horseman and the great hope of all those
who longed for a change from the extravagant, yet mean-spirited rule, of his father.
This is the side of him that most of his contemporaries saw. But we have at our disposal
letters, private memoirs and other records, and as we look back we can detect also
another aspect of his character, and one that was to be profoundly reflected in his
artistic tastes: a sort of fin-de-siecle preciosity in reaction against the stuffiness of his
‘Victorian’ surroundings,. a love of frisson, an inclination for somewhat equivocal
pleasures. All his biographers stress that Ferdinand’s reaction against his father was one
of the dominating emotions of his fife. With his uncle Francesco Maria, only three
years older than himself, he led the opposition, and, as so often where political activity
is out of the question, this took the form of licence and wild behaviour. Accompanied
everywhere by troops of followers in search of pleasure, the two young men outraged
the solemn decorum of the court much as Marguerite d’Orléans had done already.
Eventually marriage was insisted on and agreed to in return for permission to visit
Venice at carnival time. After some futile negotiations with Portugal, a rather plain
Bavarian princess, Violante, was discovered and wedded with spectacular ceremonies
but little love. Year after year the court, and Europe, waited in-vain for an heir to ensure
the survival of the Medici line. A second reckless—and bachelor—visit to Venice in 1696
was scarcely calculated to promote this end, and during the early years of the eighteenth
century other members of the family were called upon to try where the Grand Prince
1 Zanotti, n, p. 50.
* See Galluzzi and, for more intimate details of the private lives of these last members of the family,
Pieraccini, G. Conti and Acton.

--- [Page 32] ---

230 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
had failed. Their efforts too came to nothing. Meanwhile Ferdinand gave up the struggle
and retired to his country houses, especially Poggio a Caiano and Pratolino, there to
enjoy himself and to organise his brilliant theatrical displays and picture collections.
He was passionately fond of music and for many years he employed Alessandro Scarlatti
to write operas for him and himself played a notable part in their composition.1 His
theatre at Pratolino was famous throughout Italy and for it he employed leading stage
designers such as members of the Bibbiena family.2 He corresponded with artists and
musicians and his great sensibilities made him the most discriminating patron of many
of the most interesting painters of the day. He welcomed foreign scholars and delighted
to show them his great collections. He supported writers such as Apostolo Zeno,
Benedetto Menzini and Scipione Maffei, and he financed the pubheation of sumptuous
editions of Francesco Redi and other poets.3 But now ill-health began to strike: epileptic
fits and, apparently, the inevitable consequences of his earlier dissipation. His last years
were more and more clouded by sickness, and he died in 1713 at the age of 50. His
tyrannical old father was still on the throne after forty-three years. It was as if the
Regent had died before Louis XIV. ‘With his death,’ wrote a contemporary admirer,4
‘there died too all signs of brio and joyfulness in Florence and Tuscany. With his death
there was lost the protector of painting, sculpture, letters and all the other liberal arts—
for other princes did not share his magnanimous tastes.’
The most important events in Ferdinand’s life were his two visits to Venice. The
city already had the reputation it long retained of allowing and encouraging every
pleasure known to man except that of political unorthodoxy, and the Grand Prince
took full advantage of most of them. We can follow him throughout February and
March 1696, ‘delighted’ from the very first day ‘with the freedom of this country—
especially the convenience of the mask which allows him to go anywhere without
drawing attention to himself.. .’.5 Night after night he goes to the opera and the ridotto;
he visits all the specialities of Venetian carnival entertainment which we know so well
from the paintings just then beginning to record them for tourists—the forze d’Ercole,
the fight between the Castellani and the Nicolotti, the masked balls. The Republic
gave him lavish presents and he reciprocated. It was all very different from Florence;
no wonder that when he left he announced his intention of returning to Venice for the
next carnival. He never did: but the memory haunted him for the rest of his life and he
was able to put it to good use. For besides more spectacular pleasures, so diligently
recorded by the Florentine agents, he had also been carefully admiring and studying
1 The remarkable series of letters from Alessandro Scarlattito Ferdinand are in the Archivio Mediceo.
See also Fabbri and, for a full account of his musical activities, Puliti.
2 Sgrilli.
3 For all this see Elogio del su Serenissimo Ferdinando de' Medici Principe di Toscana in Vol. XVH, 1714,
of the Giornale de’ Letterati Italiani of which he himself had been patron; and also the letter from Scipione
Maffei, dated 14 April 1710, No. 370, Filza $903 of the Archivio Mediceo.
4 Probably the lawyer Luca Ombrosi, writing in the middle of the eighteenth century—see Vita del
Cran Principe Ferdinando di Toscana in the Biblioteca Grassoccia, Firenze 1887, p. 96.
* Archivio Mediceo, Filza 3050°: Matteo del Teglia—Carteggio e Avvisi da Venezia, 1695-7.

--- [Page 33] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 231
the great pictures which still made Venetian collections and churches the richest in
Europe. Years later he could recall some of them which he hoped to acquire for himself.
In the masterpieces of Titian, Veronese and Bassano which filled the palaces of his hosts
he saw a tradition of painting which had long been considered the antithesis to the great
Florentine Renaissance. Ferdinand, like many other lively spirits of the early years of
the eighteenth century, was seduced by this tradition and longed to make it live again.
Although Ferdinand had always been a keen collector and patron, his forcible
personality could not find much scope for expression in Florentine art of the late
seventeenth century. His early acquired pictures differed little from those that were
regularly to be seen in the average noble collection of the day. They included, for
instance, a number of religious works painted for him by Baldassare Franceschini, a late
follower of Pietro da Cortona who died in 1689? Yet quite soon he relied on his
unerring instinct to pick out the one picture by this artist which could satisfy his love
of novelty. Some time before 1693 he bought La Burla del Pievano Arlotto which
Franceschini had painted in tempera many years earlier for a private citizen (Plate 37c).2
Its homely and archaic simplicity owed more both in style and in the inspiration of its
subject to Tuscan narrative of the fifteenth century than .to experiments in naturalism
being made elsewhere in Italy at this time. It was, however, not very long before
Ferdinand had the opportunity of encouraging a comparable type of intimacy in the
works of Crespi.
Meanwhile he showed his appreciation of the great tradition of Florentine painting
by purchasing Fra Bartolommeo’s S. Marco from the church dedicated to that saint and
having it replaced by a copy in 1692.3 This was, indeed, a habit to which Ferdinand was
much addicted. During the 1690s he bought from various churches in Florence and
elsewhere Raphael’s Madonna del Baldacchino, Andrea del Sarto’s Madonna delle Arpie,
Cigoli’s Deposition and Orazio Riminaldi’s Martyrdom of St CeciliaA Of his contem­
poraries he showed an interest chiefly hi Anton Domenico Gabbiani, a painter faithful,
as far as his talents lay, to the classical, Marattesque canons of art5 to whom Ferdinand
remained loyal long after his own horizons had been immeasurably widened.
This widening was clearly brought about by his visits to Venice, though a taste
for Venetian art had already appeared at the Medici court through the activities of his
great uncle Cardinal Leopold, who had amassed a very large collection of works by
masters of the Renaissance.® Ferdinand now set out to amplify this collection. The names
ofTitian, Veronese, Bassano, Palma Giovane and many other painters of the Venetian
sixteenth century constantly recur in the letters which he wrote over the next few
1 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 411. _
2 Now in the Pitri, No. 582. For its history see Giglioli, 1908, and Steinhart, 1936.
3 Now in the Pitri, No. 125. The copy was painted by Antonio Franchi—see Bartolozzi.
4 There is a certain amount of confusion about these pictures from Florentine and other churches—
see Bencivenni and Jahn-Rusconi—but though slight discrepancies exist in the various accounts and in
the sources, the general outline is clear enough.
5 See especially Hugford and Bartarelli.
6 For some general information on Cardinal Leopold’s collecting see [Bencivenni], I, pp. 248-61,
and II, pp. 181-7.

--- [Page 34] ---

232 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
years to Niccolo Cassana, the Genoese artist who acted as his agent in Venice as from
1698? From these letters it is possible to sec just what he admired in the Venetians. The
expressions which he uses most frequently to show approval are gran gusto or buon gusto
—vague terms, perhaps, but ones that suggest his relish for painting. When used, as
they so often are, about particular pictures, they give us a close insight into the nature
of his feelings: a Veronese is admired because it is ‘di un gran gusto di colore, bizzarre
per Tinvenzione, e pare uscito adcsso dal penello dcH’Autore’; an engraving is ‘molto
bizzarro, e di buon gusto’; an artist working for him is required to paint ‘qualche cosa di
bizzarro’; another is told to be ‘meno flemmatico’. He sees a Maffei for the first time
and is delighted with its ‘bellissimo impasto’; in Livorno there is a Rape of the Sabines
by Virgilio Bassanino which looks like a Strozzi and ‘vi è un brio di pennello grande’;
a Van Dyck bozzetto is ‘spiritoso’. From these expressions and from many more we can
gauge an entirely coherent taste based on an appreciation of the liveliness of the indi­
vidual brushstroke and of colour—for him of very much greater importance than the
correct drawing which played such a vital part in Roman art theory at the time. He
showed an acute sensitivity to the actual quality of the paint, to that belle matière which
was to be so very attractive to eighteenth-century connoisseurs. Like many of these
connoisseurs, but unlike most of the great aristocratic collectors to whom by origin and
status he belonged, Ferdinand combined this sensitivity with a very real understanding
of artistic quality, and hence was able to show great discrimination in his appreciation
of pictures. In a Rubens he suspects that one of the satyrs was added rather later than
the others, and that there is a certain difference of touch in the foliage of the trees; he
gives detailed practical instructions on how to pack a picture; he reads through Lives of
the Painters; he jokes about those who cannot distinguish the work of one artist
from another.
Such knowledge and refinement not only began to affect his collecting—in 1698
he bought Parmigianino’s Madonna del Collo Lungo ‘disegnata come da Raffaello,
sinita con 1’anima’2—but were vital in his patronage of contemporary artists. Yet with
two conspicuous exceptions he was not as successful in this field as his talents entitled
him to be, for the whole trend of art theory conflicted with his personal tastes and it was
not easy to find painters unaffected by the classicising doctrines of this phase of the
Baroque.
For Ferdinand art patronage involved, a greater degree of collaboration than was
usual between prince and painter. This might range from sending his court painter an
eagle to help with a Ganymede to discussing the figures of a composition.3 His attitude
is clearly shown in a significant remark he lets slip in a letter to Cassana4: ‘Tell Fumiani
that the only figure I want is that of David; it will then be easy enough to remove it
and do it in our way.’ He insisted on always seeing tnodelli of the pictures he ordered, as
1 See Fogolari, 1937—with special reference to Letters 22, 23, 26, 49, 59, 71, 74, 81, 91, 93 and 124.
2 See the letters from Ferdinand, dated 11 October and I December 1698 to the Duke of Parma,
published by Emilio Robiony, and also Fogolari, 1937, Letter 28 of 9 January 1699.
3 Hugford, Bartolozzi and the Elogio as well as Fogolari, 193 7, Letter 45 of 16 May 1699.
4 Fogolari, 1937, Letter 45 of 16 May 1699.

--- [Page 35] ---

Plate 37
a. G. M. Crespi: The Painter’s family b. G. M. Crespi: The Fair at Poggio a Caiano
. (detail)
r R A T V» A CQ A DE Pu A KT C'È C PUTMT • *T o Piirh ^«1 DitìTrAno Arl^»«’

--- [Page 36] ---

Plate 38 FRESCOES BY SEBASTIANO RICCI
IN PITTI PALACE, FLORENCE (see Plates 38 and 39)
a. Rape of Europa
b. Pan and Syrinx

--- [Page 37] ---

Plate 39

--- [Page 38] ---

Plate 40
a. A. D. Gabbiani: A group of musicians

--- [Page 39] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 233
much for purely aesthetic reasons as for checking the accuracy of the content. Indeed he
collected modelli of pictures painted for other patrons before this was as common as it
later became.1 He enjoyed watching artists at work and discussing with them the actual
procedure of painting—the colours to be used, the thickness of the canvas and so on.
All these traits can be seen in his relations with Gabbiani (Plate 40a). The reasons why
he employed for so long this rather mediocre, Marattesque painter while ignoring other
Florentine artists such as Gherardini, Sagrestani or Galeotti whose styles corresponded
far more to his tastes are impossible to fathom.2 It may have been that same feeling of
loyalty that made him take particular trouble not to hurt the ageing landscape painter
Francesco Bassi despite the doubts he had about the value of his work.3 More likely it
was the feeling that Gabbiani (who always professed a passionate attachment to Venetian
painting) was directly under his control and so could be used to express some of his
own artistic'ambitions. Whatever the reasons, the outcome was hardly very successful
despite a special visit to Venice which Gabbiani paid in 1699 at the age of 47 to oblige
his patron by improving his colour. Nor does Ferdinand’s particular protege Sacconi
appear to have lived up to his hopes, though he too was sent to Venice.4 The Grand
Prince took the deepest interest in his career. He provided for him financially when his
father died and kept him working under Niccolo Cassana. Constant exhortations and
orders followed him there: for a St Sebastian ‘as he must learn to paint full length
figures’, a St Giustina, a Bacchanal. Ferdinand notes that his colour is improving under
Cassana’s guidance, but warns him to be ‘meno flemmatico’. He arranges for his
pictures to be exhibited on Corpus Domini and is delighted with their humour. But it
seems that not even Venice and the most encouraging of patrons could make much of
the artist.
More fruitful were Ferdinand’s contacts with some of the other painters living in
Venice, among them Karl Loth with whom he must have got in touch on his first visit,
for this German artist was already painting for him by 1691 and continued to do so
until his death some seven years later.5 But by then, although he made particular efforts
to get hold of some half-length figures by Loth ‘as that is what he was best at’, Ferdinand
had already paid his second visit to the city and found there an artist who, despite his
mediocre abilities, was ideally responsive to the sort of pressure he liked to exert. The
1 Francesco Trevisani sent him the modello ofhis Banquet 0/ Anthony and Cleopatra painted for Cardinal
Fabrizio Spada-Varallo—see MS. life of this artist by Pascoli in the Biblioteca Augusta, Perugia, MS. 1383.
8 Payments to other painters and sculptors in Florence are recorded in the Archivio Mediceo,
Guardaroba 1055. The most interesting of these are Pietro Dandini and Giovanni Battista Foggini. Other
very minor Tuscan artists also worked for him: Antonio Franchi has already been mentioned; for Fran­
cesco Botti, Giuseppe Pinacci, Romolo Panfi, Cristofano Monari, etc., see Abate Orazio Martini.
3 Fogolari, 1937, Letter 83 of 17 March 1703.
4 ibid., with special reference to Letters 6, 12, 28, 60 and 71.
5 Fogolari, 1937, publishes a letter from Loth of 14 August 1691 thanking the Prince for a present of
oil and wine and telling him that he is about to embark on a copy of Titian’s St Peter Martyr. In 1693 he
sent his self portrait to Florence. The Pitti contains a Death of Abel by him and six of his pictures are
recorded in Ferdinand’s collection in the 1716 inventory—see p. 239, note 5, and also Fogolari, 1937,
Letters 22 and 77. See catalogue entries in Ewald, 1965.

--- [Page 40] ---

234 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
relations between Giannaritonio Fumiani and the Grand Prince can tell ns much about
the fantasies which he was so eager to have expressed by the artists who worked for him.1
He wanted a picture to match one by Domenichino and he proceeded to give Fumiani
its dimensions and a very elaborate programme. It must show, he wrote to his agent
Cassana, an architectural background into which must be inserted guards; in the fore­
ground David must be seen at prayer. Cassana himself is to paint the figure of David,
though if Fumiani insists he may do so and it can be changed later. He must send the
modello to Ferdinand for inspection. It duly arrived and proved satisfactory, but David,
commented the Prince, should display more movement. Perhaps it would be improved
by an angel flying through the sky with a flaming sword and offering the king the
choice of the three punishments.2 David must show great surprise—here would be a
good chance for expressing movement. Besides, the composition could be enriched by
placing at his side his harp, lais sceptre and his diadem. And then Ferdinand changed his
mind. He wanted another subject from the Old Testament which would be the most
bizzarra of all. The instructions have been lost, but this was evidently to be The Stoning
of Zechariah, a picture which was recorded in Ferdinand’s inventory and which is now
in the Uffizi (Plate 40b).3 It seems clear that these subjects, though unusual in art, held
no special significance for him other than as pretexts for fanciful composition.
Niccolo Cassana also worked a good deal for Ferdinand as painter as well as
artistic adviser. He visited Florence on various occasions chiefly so as to paint portraits
of the Prince and his household, and from time to time he would send pictures from
Venice.4 In September 1707 his Portrait os a Cook reached Florence to the delight of the
Prince, who commented on its realistic details (he particularly wanted to know who
the sitter was) and above all on its bold, Venetian, ‘painterly’ quality, so different, as he
pointed out, from the timid efforts of native Florentine artists. Cassana also painted
history pictures for the Grand Prince, mostly in a light vein—a Bacchanal, a Venus
playing with Cupid and so on, though there was also a Conspiracy of Catiline.5
1 Fogolari, 1937, Letters 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 61 and 63 between May and
November 1699.. _
2 This rather unusual subject is taken from II Samuel xxiv, 12.
3 The picture is recorded in the 1716 inventory—see p. 239, note 5. The subject, which is taken
from IT Chronicles xxiv, 21, is wrongly described as The Punishment of the Prophet Ananias in the catalogue
' ' of La Pittura del Seicento a Venezia, 1959, p. 106. For another example of Ferdinand’s patronage of Fumiani
see the curious letter written by him directly to the artist and published in Note 34 of Fogolari, 1937.
4 Ratti (see Soprani/Ratti, II, 14) refers to portraits by Cassana of the Grand Prince himself, his
wife, his gentiluomo di camera and other courtiers including jesters, as well as his self-portrait and various
history pictures. See also Fogolari, 1937, Letter 120 of 3 September 1707.
6 The Conspiracy of Catiline is probably a copy from Rosa and is now in the Pitti (No. in)—see
Jahn-Rusconi, p. 238.
Giovanni Battista Langetti, another Genoese artist who worked in Venice, was also admired by
Ferdinand. Ratti (Soprani/Ratti, H, 26), who reports seeing a portrait and a picture of card players by
him in the Medici collection, says that Langetti was actually employed by Ferdinand in Florence. But this
is impossible as Langetti died in 1676 when the Prince was only aged 11. See also Fogolari, 1937, Letter
92 of 25 January 1704.

--- [Page 41] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 23 $
Much more valuable were the pictures on glass of The Flight into Egypt painted,
for Ferdinand by Luca Giordano. The great Neapolitan painter called on the Grand
Prince at Livorno in May 1702 on his return from Spain and is known to have worked
for him for a time before setting out for home.1
The history of Ferdinand’s patronage given so far suggests that with this one
exception he was a very much more interesting figure than any of the painters who
worked for him. And indeed he would be remembered merely as a remarkable personality in an artistic backwater were it not for the fact that towards the very end of his life
he found two artists whose talents were at last equal to the demands he made on them
and who consequently painted for him some of their most striking work.
It is not clear how Ferdinand first got into touch with Sebastiano Ricci, for the
artist was not in Venice during either of the Grand Prince’s two visits there. However
that may be, in 1704 Ferdinand commissioned from him a Crucifixion with the Madonna,
St John and St Charles Borromeo to replace Andrea del Sarto’s Madonna delle Arpie which
he had bought from the nuns of S. Francesco de’ Macci for his own gallery.2 Ricci
seems to have paid a short visit to Florence in order to paint the picture on the spot and
thereafter to have assisted Cassana in his duties of keeping the Prince informed as to
what pictures were available on the Venetian market.3 Within a year or two Ricci had
already found other patrons in Florence among the Grand Prince’s circle of friends, for
the brothers Marucelli.of whom Francesco, the most distinguished, had died in Rome in
1703, were employing him to decorate several rooms in their palace. In May 1706 he
enclosed some paintings for them in the two crates he sent to the Grand Prince^which
. included a couple of small landscapes by his nephew Marco.4 At the same time he made
his first allusion to a forthcoming visit to Florence to paint a room in Ferdinand’s
gallery of Venetian pictures at Poggio a Caiano. Ferdinand’s reply a week later was
somewhat discouraging: ill-health was causing him to postpone the projected scheme.5
However, shortly afterwards the situation improved and Ricci arrived to paint an
Allegory of the Arts in Ferdinand’s favourite gallery in his favourite villa. This work has
unfortunately been destroyed,® but dazzling testimonials to Ricci’s Florentine activities
survive in the great decorations that he painted for Ferdinand’s friends the Marucelli
and for the Grand Prince himself in a small room in the Pitti.
1 A Letter from the Grand Prince, dated 26 May 1702, (ibid.. Letter 75) says: ‘Mentre che scrivo è
, qui [Livorno] da me Luca Giordano che ritorna da Napoli.’ The Abate Orazio Martini, Parte I, Vol. I,
p. 38, says that on his return from Spain Luca Giordano ‘colorì varie pitture’ for Ferdinand in Florence.
2 Fogolari, 1937, Letters 98 and 99 of 30 August and 20 September 1704.
3 Some of these letters have been published by Fogolari, 1937. They show Ricci writing to Ferdinand
of works by Livio Mehus, Ghisolfi, Lyss, Simon Vouet and others. -
4 Letter of 1 May 1706 in Archivio Mediceo, Filza 5903, No. 197: published in Appendix 4. In the
exhibition of October 1706 (see p. 240, note 5) Orazio Marucelli exhibited a Flora by Sebastiano Ricci.
5 Letter of 8 May 1706—Archivio Mediceo Filza 5903, No. zoo—published in Appendix 4.
8 At the end of the eighteenth century T. G. Farsetti referred to the ceiling as follows—Fogolari,
1937, p. 186: ‘Nella camera de’ quadri veneziani, che il Principe Ferdinando ha formato al Poggio, e
ch’ora è sfornita per essersi trasportati detti quadri in Galleria, ed in altri luoghi, si vede un soffitto dipinto
in figure di due terzi, mirabile per l’invenzione e contrasto, come per il vago colorito, e buon disegno.
In questo si rappresentano allegorie convenienti alle Arti sorelle ecc.’

--- [Page 42] ---

236 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
From everything we know of Ferdinand’s patronage it is beyond doubt that he
himself must have collaborated extensively in the work. Indeed, some forty years
later, a writer who knew Ricci personally makes it quite clear that he had followed
specific instructions from the Grand Prince in carrying out the decoration.1 There is,
of course, no record of these, but it is easy enough to see that Ricci’s delightful frescoes,
which represent a new departure in his career, reflect the more lighthearted and ‘avant­
garde’ atmosphere of Ferdinand’s court. The Prince’s own character, indeed, symbolised
the fact that the new century was going to be less harsh, less bigoted, and less passionate
than the one that was just over, and it is this change that seems to be asserted in Ricci’s
frescoes. The heavy drama which had marked most Baroque ceiling decoration, the
crowds of solidly built figures which had been characteristic of Ricci’s previous ventures
in the field and even to some extent of his almost contemporary work in the Palazzo
Marucelli, here give way at a single bound to delicacy and lightness of touch. The ceiling
is a glorification ofsun and air—a pale, cool blue sky with delicate pink clouds on which
Venus, in brilliant yellow, takes her leave from Adonis dressed in a gay, purple tunic
inspired by costumes of the sixteenth century (Plate 39)? Putti hover around, and
below, on a rocky verge, strain two greyhounds, sleek and slender, the favourite
animals of the new century. There is a delicate longing in the look between the two
lovers, but no hint of the tragedy to come. Around the walls, and in elaborate cartouches
above a painted balustrade, are further scenes from Ovid—Diana and Callisto, Pan and
Syrinx, Europa and the Bull, Diana and Actaeon (Plates 38a, 38b)—and in the four corners
are painted busts of men and women vaguely evoking the antique. Over the main door
angels support a shield with the Medici arms while putti with a crown hover above, the
whole forming a brilliant asymmetrical composition. Everything is painted with a
verve and a nervous, fluent panache that were totally new to Florence and indeed to
European art. The frescoes delighted Ferdinand, and yet their intimate, rococo style, which
was to become so popular in the boudoirs of Paris, proved to have little suture in Italy.
Ricci also painted various pictures for him at this time, particularly of little figures
disporting themselves against architectural backgrounds which were usually the work
of a collaborator. These especially appealed to his taste—‘le figurette mi piacciono
assaissimo, perche sono graziose, ben distribuite e fatte con poco’, he wrote of one pair
of such scenes he had been shown,3 and macchiette of this kind were to become enor­
mously popular as the century progressed. Ricci wrote again to Ferdinand in 1708 after
3 The Abate Gherardi, who in 1749 published an anonymous account of some of Consul Smith’s
pictures in Venice. Writing of Ricci, he says (p. 73): . . . quivi [Florence] giunto che fu ed accoltovi
benignamente intesi ch’ebbe i sentimenti di esso Gran Principe intorno la composizion dell’ideato lavoro
pittoresco da fare: di tutto buon grado vi si appose secondando il genio dell’Altezza sua; ed avendolo con
ispeditezza, bravura, e soddisfazion terminato, ebbe dal copioso pagamento e da i regali fattigli dare un
manifesto riscontro della pienezza di gradimento di esso Gran Principe ...'.
2 The sketch for this fresco is now in the Orleans Museum.
3 Fogolari, 1937, Letter 106 of 3 April 1705. It is not clear whether the pictures in question were by
Ricci or not. The 1716 inventory (see p. 239, note 5) describes an architectural painting by Saluzzi with
figures by Sebastiano Ricci. This is now in the Pinacoteca at Lucca. It is initialled and dated 1706.

--- [Page 43] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 237
his return to Venice, but a year later he went to England and stayed abroad until
1716.
The Grand Prince was not the only person to be impressed by Ricci’s work in
Florence. Back in Bologna in February 1708, after a brief visit to the Medici capital,
Giuseppe Maria Crespi wrote to Ferdinand that he too had been very struck by the
Venetian painter’s ‘spirit’.1 And although the two most interesting artists of the period,
both of whom were pioneering a decisive break with late Baroque conventions, missed
meeting each other by two or three months at Ferdinand’s court, the new mood that
prevailed there profoundly affected them both. Crespi’s own innovations had'much in
common with Ricci’s—a looser brush stroke, a more painterly and spirited manner, a
greater display of individual temperament and a devotion to the Venetian tradition;
it is therefore hardly surprising that he received all possible encouragement from
Ferdinand when he arrived in Florence at the beginning of 1708 to present him his
Massacre of the Innocents.2 Crespi’s anxiety to work for Ferdinand provides clear evidence
of the importance that the Grand Prince’s court had by now assumed for artists outside
Florence,3 and when he brought the picture to Ferdinand he was deeply impressed by
his discrimination and enthusiasm. The Grand Prince at once commissioned a couple
of still lives from Crespi—a curious and significant choice of subject after the dazzling
agitation of the history painting which had introduced the artist to him.4 In fact,
Ferdinand is of great importance in Crespi’s career partly for this very reason. He seems
to have been among the first to appreciate the essentially intimate nature of Crespi’s
talents. The commissions with which he flooded the artist were all ‘d’argomenti
piacevoli’, and with the support of such a powerful protector Crespi was able to break
away from the religious and secular histories which had hitherto formed the bulk of his
output. On this first visit to Florence he remained scarcely more than a month5; but he
1 Letter of 26 February 1708—Archivio Mediceo, Filza 5904, No. 22—published in Appendix 4.
2 Crespi arrived with a letter of introduction—Archivio Mediceo, Filza 5897, No. 183—published
in Appendix 4. The full story of how he came to give the Massacre of the Innocents to Ferdinand has been
told by Zanotti, II, p. 46. It has subsequently been confirmed by documents—see catalogue of Mostra
Celebration di Giuseppe M. Crespi, Bologna 1948, p. 29. The picture had been commissioned by a priest
Don Carlo Silva to present to Ferdinand. When it was finished the priest defaulted on his obligations
and announced that he had no further intention of giving it to the Grand Prince. It was then that Crespi
decided to come in person to Livorno, where his arrival and welcome are colourfully described by Zanotti.
Ferdinand himself took a hand in the disputes and litigation from which Crespi emerged victorious. See
letters-between Ferdinand and Silva in Archivio Mediceo, Filza 3904, Nos. 96, 155, 299 and 607; and also
letter from Ferdinand to the Marchesa Eleonora Zambeccari in Archivio Mediceo, Filza 5897, No. 287.
3 Crespi may possibly have been employed some years before the two men actually met. The
Ecstasy of St Margaret, originally in S. Maria Nuova in Cortona and now in the Diocesan Museum there,
was painted to replace Lanfranco’s picture of the same subject which Ferdinand bought for himself. It
seems a much earlier work than the group of paintings by Crespi considered here, and it is mentioned
earlier by his biographer, Zanotti, II, p. 44. See also the Mostra di Giuseppe M. Crespi, p. 29.
Other Bolognese artists in touch with Ferdinand were Ercole Graziani, Giovan Gioseffo Santi
(Zanotti, I, pp. 263 and 210) and Giovan Gioseffo dal Sole—sec letters of April and May 1708 in Archivio
Mediceo, Filza 5904, Nos. 44 and 64.
4 L. Crespi, p. 211.
* He was back in Bologna by February 26,1708—see above, note 1.

--- [Page 44] ---

238 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
was clearly as anxious to maintain his connection with Ferdinand as was the latter to
make use of a painter whose gifts so exactly suited his own temperament. Hardly had
he returned to Bologna at the end of February before he began sending pictures to his
new patron—a Nativity arrived early in March, followed by a Self portrait a month later
with assurances of the artist’s eternal remembrance of the Prince’s kindness and promises
of his own ‘vasallaggio’. The Prince wrote back to say how delighted he was with the
Selfportrait that showed the artist’s good humour1 and thereafter the friendship between
the two men was sealed. Indeed Ferdinand’s interest in Crespi brought him into touch
with the artist’s patrons in Bologna—particularly Giovanni Ricci, the rich marchand­
amateur who had financed his early travels throughout Italy and subsequently acquired
a very large proportion of his work; and also the Pepoli family in whose palace he had
some fifteen years earlier painted the great ceiling frescoes which first established his
reputation as a considerable and highly original master. Now in 1708 the Pepoli were
considering structural alterations to the palace which would involve destroying the
frescoes, and only two urgent letters from Ferdinand stopped this plan being carried out.2
Meanwhile throughout 1708 Crespi continued to work for him. In December he
sent a copy of Guercino’s St William of Aquitaine as well as his own small painting of
The Painter’s Family, the most informal portrait group that had yet appeared in Italian
art and a striking testimony to Crespi’s confidence in Ferdinand’s tastes (Plate 37a).3
During these months he also sent a satirical picture of the priest who had originally
commissioned the Massacre of the Innocents as a gift for Ferdinand and had then failed
to stick to the agreement between them, as well as two small genre scenes of Children
at Play and Women washing their Laundry at a Fountain—an early treatment of a subject
that was to be immensely popular with artists throughout the eighteenth century.4
In 1709 Crespi returned to Florence with his family and was given rooms by
Ferdinand in his villa at Pratolino, where he stayed for several months. During this
visit he painted a large number of pictures for the Grand Prince, who collected his
work with increasing enthusiasm and who showed his appreciation with lavish presents
and by consenting to become godfather to Crespi’s newborn son, called Ferdinando in
his honour. At the same time he gave official recognition to Crespi’s position at court
by naming him his ‘pittore attuale’. Crespi responded with a great many genre scenes
and one of his masterpieces, the Fair at Poggio a Caiano, which included portraits of
Ferdinand’s courtiers (Plate 37b).6
By the beginning of November he was back in Bologna.8 It is possible that he paid
a third visit to Florence, but by this time Ferdinand’s final illness was upon him and the
1 Letters of March and April 1708 in the Archivio Mediceo, Filza 5904, Nos. 26, 38 and 357.
2 For the correspondence between Ferdinand and Ricci see Archivio Mediceo, Filza 5904, Nos. 167
anf 476. For the letters between Ferdinand and the Pepoli, ibid., Nos. 174, 489 and 490.
3 See the letter from Ferdinand published by Luigi Crespi, p. 203. The original draft is in the Archivio
Mediceo, Filza 5904, No. 475. The Painter's Family is in the Uffizi, No. 5382.
4 These pictures are—or were in 1941—in the Gabinetto del R. Intendente di Finanza di Pisa—see
Casini, pp. 42-50.
6 The picture is now in the Uffizi—see Zanotti, n, p. 55, and L. Crespi, p. 211.
8 A letter of 3 November 1709 (Archivio Mediceo, Filza 5904, No. 272) reports his return to Bologna.

--- [Page 45] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 239
great days of his patronage were over.1 Crespi is indeed the last artist whom we know
to have worked for him. .
Both painter and patron had benefited greatly from the close partnership between
them. Ferdinand was the most cultivated and sensitive collector that Crespi had yet (or
ever was to) come across, and in his gallery the artist was able to study at length those
Venetian painters whom they both loved. That he took full advantage of this is proved
by a letter in which he speaks of having been shown in the Medici collections a picture
attributed to Tintoretto which had in fact been painted by himself.2 Fully as important
was die support that Ferdinand gave him in his attempts to break away from the
conventional ‘history picture’. Such new ventures were bound to result in some loss of
prestige and to meet with derision. The humour with which all his contemporaries
approached Crespi in some ways reflects their bewilderment at his unconventional
painting, and for many of them (and for many years later) it coloured their appreciation
of his art. Genre scenes were expected to be humorous and so they laughed, without
realising that Crcspi’s humour was often tinged with melancholy and was in any case
counteracted by a deep, poetic sympathy for the people whom he painted. It is difficult
to say how much Ferdinand himself shared these misconceptions about Crespi’s art.
His recorded opinions and—much more important—his letters suggest that he too saw
him primarily as a humourist3; on the other hand the very great restraint with which
the artist painted for him subjects which lay themselves open to gross or bawdy treat­
ment (Plate 36b) makes clear that he must have relied on Ferdinand’s appreciating a
side ef his temperament that was ignored by many. Indeed, the unique place held by
Ferdinand in the history of Italian patronage is shown by the fact that such sober,
sympathetic treatment of the poor and simple remained quite exceptional in Italian art.
With the backing of a cultivated middle class Crespi might have turned into the Chardin
to whom he is sometimes so near; in fact with the removal from the scene of Ferdinand,
the most ‘modern’ prince of the age in Italy—and as yet only princes could be influential
patrons—Crespi retired into the provincial backwater of Bologna.4
The pictures that Ferdinand amassed were distributed in his apartments in the Pitti
Palace and in the various country houses through which he moved during the year.
By the end of his life their numbers were very considerable. In the Pitti alone were 300
entirely from his private collection, quite apart from the many which had been assem­
bled by earlier members of the family.5 The accent was strongly on Venetian pictures,
1 L. Crespi, p. 211, says that he was in Florence for two years, whereas it has been shown that during -
1709 he was-there for eight months at most. On the other hand Zanotti, II, p. $4, implies that he went
there several times. 2 See p. 237, note 1. —
3 Zanotti, II, pp. 52 and 54, and Letter from Ferdinand of 28 April 1708 in Archivio Medicco, Filza
5904, No. 3 57.
‘ 4 The restricting effect of this on Crespi’s art has been pointed out by R. Longhi in his introduction
to the 1948 exhibition catalogue.
6 Inventario di Quadri, che si ritrovano negl'appartamenti del gran palazzo de Pitti di S.A.R., kept at the
Soprintendenza alle Gallerie di Firenze. It can be dated between 1716 and 1723. For the sake of convenience
I have referred to it as the 1716 Inventory. All the pictures from Ferdinand’s own collection are marked
S.P.F.

--- [Page 46] ---

240 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
including about ten attributed to Titian. There were also Flemish works, but only the
barest representation of contemporary Roman painting. Of the Florentine school of
the day only one artist was present in bulk; the Flemish Livio Mehus, thirty of whose
works Ferdinand owned. Such prominence is not surprising, for Mehus was by far
the most Venetian of all the artists in his entourage and his tremendous vivacity com­
bined with a slightly troubled eroticism made an obvious appeal to Ferdinand. Only
the death of this painter in 1691, before Ferdinand’s patronage had reached its fullest
extent, can have prevented him working directly for the Grand Prince who sought
to make amends for this neglect by assiduously collecting his canvases and giving
support to his son.1
In Poggio a Caiano Ferdinand had a special room in which he kept small examples
of each of his favourite artists, ancient and contemporary, and it was this that Sebastiano
Ricci painted for him in 1707. He kept further large collections at Pratolino and the
Villa di Castello.
But Ferdinand’s activities as patron were not confmed to increasing his own
collection or supporting those particular artists who took Iris fancy. He was also anxious
to guide the whole direction taken by painters in the Florence of his day. For this pur­
pose he took advantage of the still rudimentary instrument- of the art exhibition and
used it in an entirely new way. Pictures had been exhibited in Florence, as in many
other Italian cities, on the occasion of the Corpus Domini processions, and Ferdinand
regularly showed works painted for him by those artists of whom he approved, such as
Gabbiani, whose Flight into Egypt he put on view to the public in the Piazza del Duomo.2
He adopted the same policy towards Sacconi3 and especially Cassana to whom he
wrote in 1707, full of admiration for the ‘gran gusto’ of his Portrait of a Cook which he
intended to exhibit so that it would be seen ‘by our own artists here who paint so
timidly’? But Ferdinand probably found such exhibitions too casual to produce the
effect he hoped for, and by 1706 he had already organised something far grander. He
had probably picked up the idea from the S. Rocco exhibitions in Venice (to be
described in a later chapter), though he ran his own one on far more spectacular lines.
A printed catalogue was issued—and this in itself was an innovation for Italy.5 From this
catalogue we can reconstruct the event. The exhibition was held on St Luke’s day (18
October) in the chapel dedicated to that saint in the cloisters of the Annunziata. About
250 pictures were shown, nearly all of them borrowed from the great collections of
Florence, though none came from the Grand Duke’s. The pictures were hung in groups
of about eight to ten in the lunettes of the cloister. As the visitor entered he turned to
the right and, in the first lunette, he at once came across twelve pictures lent by Ferdi­
nand himself, followed (above the door of the chapel) by a portrait of the Grand Prince
1 Fogolari, 1937, p. l6l, note 43, for Ricci acquiring works by Mehus for Ferdinand.
2 Hugford, p. 10. 3 Fogolari, 1937, Letter 12 of 7 June 1698.
4 ibid., Letter 120 of 3 September 1707.
5 The catalogue is called Nota de’ Quadri che sono esposti per la festa di S. Luca dagli accademici del disegno
nella loro cappella posta nel Chiostro del Monastero de' Padri della SS. Nonziata di Firenze I’Anno 1706. In
Firenze 1706.

--- [Page 47] ---

THE PROVINCIAL SCENE 241
who thus unmistakably showed his patronage of the whole venture. No less clear was
the orientation of his taste, and hence the general impulse he wished to give to con­
temporary art. Of the twenty-odd pictures he lent in all, seven were Venetian old
masters—a Giorgione, a Titian, a Veronese, a Tintoretto, a Pordenone, a Schiavone
and a Paris Bordone; there were also an early Guercino, a Lodovico Carracci and a
Schedoni. Besides these he lent his Guido Cagnacci Magdalene (‘di colore freschissimo’),1
his Cassana Portrait of a Hunter and, almost certainly, four landscapes by Marco Ricci.2
Not a single work by any of the Florentine artists, old or new, represented in his collection
was shown by the Grand Prince. The hint could hardly have been clearer, and it was
reinforced by further Venetian paintings lent by Cardinal Medici. In general, the
Venetians made an impressive showing in the exhibition, though there was also a strong
Neapolitan contingent mainly lent by the del Rosso brothers: thus Luca Giordano was
much in evidence. . '
The Grand Prince himself attended the exhibition which remained open for several
days and was evidently a success. But Ferdinand soon fell seriously ill, and thereafter
the Accademia del Disegno, under whose auspices it had been organised, returned to
the slumbers which had characterised most of its recent existence. Exhibitions, planned
on similar lines, took place at haphazard intervals in 1715, 1724, 1729, 173 7 and 1767?
But Ferdinand died before any of these.
By the time of his death the Venetian school of painting was widely recognised
as the most lively in Italy. Though he did not see the triumphs of its greatest masters,
he had derived immense satisfaction from his promotion of all that was most vital in
contemporary art. For a few years he turned Florence into a centre of the ‘painterly’,
in direct opposition to the classical-academic theories which dictated practice in Rome,
and it is not surprising that artists who rightly felt that their talents would have been
stifled in the papal city should have been delighted to work for him. It is for this reason
that he plays such a notable part in any account of Italian art patronage, and we can at
least understand, if not wholly endorse, the opinion of a mid-eighteenth-century writer
that he had been a prince ‘unrivalled in the world for his magnanimity and generosity’.4
By that time, as he had anticipated, the most interesting Italian painting was to be
found in Venice itself.5 .
1 Fogolari, 193 7, Letter 116 of 17 October 1705. The picture is now in the Pitti, No. 75.
2 The lender is not mentioned by name. But we know (p. 235, note 4, and Appendix 4) that Ferdi­
nand had received two of Marco’s landscapes in May 1706, and it seems very likely that these were among
those lent.
3 See the introduction to the 1767 exhibition: Il trionfo Jelle Bell'Arti renduto gloriosissimo sotto gli
auspicj delle LL.AA.RR. Pietro Leopoldo Arciduca d'Austria . . . e Maria Luisa di Borbone.
4 Sgrilli, p. z.
6 Ferdinand’s patronage of contemporary Venetian art had at least one significant follower in
eighteenth-century Florence: the Marchese Andrea Gerini, for whom sec F. Haskell in Boll, dei Musei
Civici Veneziani, i960. Francesco Gabburri, the connoisssur of drawings, also kept in touch with Venetian
artists, as can be seen from the many letters to him which are published by Bottari, Vol. II.