# 08 CHP-8 sec i

HE new world had helped to redress the balance of the old; but within Italy
Titself patronage continued to be extensive. In all the leading cities it was looked upon as the natural concomitant of wealth and power, and local schools of painting flourished vigorously on the support that they received from the great noble families and the religious orders. In Genoa a rich mercantile aristocracy dominated the Republic.
Its principal members, the Balbi and the Brignole, the Doria and Durazzo, the Imperial!,
Lomellini and Negroni, the Pallavicini, Saluzzi, Sauli and Spinola, filled their palaces with the works of native painters, the occasional contemporary picture brought back from Bologna, where the Legate or Vicelcgate was nearly always a Genoese, and a selection of old masters.1 It was the same in Naples, where the feudal landowners of the
South, the Colonnas and the Maddalonis, the Monteleones, the Sonninos and the Tarsia
Spinellis, prospered under Spanish rule and gave lavish support to a school of art that was second only to that of Rome in brilliance and diversity.2 And within the papal states themselves Bologna, the second.capital, was ruled by senatorial families who retained some semblance of autonomy—the Albergati and the Aldrovandi, the Ercolani and Ghisilieri, Pepoli and Sampieri—and who built up vast collections of the works of artists still basking in the reflected glory of the Carracci and their followers.3 And similarly in Florence, Venice and other towns. Moreover, in each one of these cities patrons from the professional classes were also of importance. In Bologna there were the doctors: Paolo Battista Balbi, Beccari and the great - Marcello Malpighi all owned pictures. Indeed the latter was a connoisseur of fine and decided tastes (‘quel abito gesuitico fa melanconia’, he wrote of a S. Luigi Gonzaga' by Guido Reni), the friend of artists such as Guercino and Cignani and a keen collector.4 And above all there were the merchants who, at the end of the century especially, played a very influential role in the artistic life of the city. Giovanni Antonio Belloni, for instance, who gave splendid hospitality to the exiled ‘James III’, owned large numbers of pictures by Giovan Gioseffo dal Sole, Felice Torelli, Crespi and Gambarini, and he sent the last artist on a journey to Rome5; and another businessman, Giovanni Battista Bellucci, also owned works by
Crespi and many more by dal Sole. But the most cultivated and interesting of this little
Zanotti, I, p. 389. The essential source for the collections of Belloni, Bellucci and, indeed, all the
Bolognese families is the manuscript B.109 in the Biblioteca Comunale, Bologna—Descrizione delle
Pitture eke ornano le Case de’ Cittadini della Cittd di Bologna—Opera di Marcello Oretti Bolognese.

[Page 204]
group of enlightened merchants was certainly Giovanni Ricci.1 He was a rich and discriminating patron who showed a keen appreciation of many contemporary artists, above all Burrini and the young Crespi. He soon realised that the latter’s imaginative gifts were bound to stultify in the provincial atmosphere of Bologna and he sent him on long visits to Venice and Central Italy to absorb a number of widely differing influences which soon made themselves felt in the pictures that Crespi painted for him.2
Ricci also acted as a dealer for Crespi on unusual and altruistic terms: he agreed to buy any of the painter’s work that became available and when he sold a picture he handed over all the profits to him, ‘and it is certain’, as the artist’s biographer observed, ‘that such noble and generous treatment which, as far as I know, is not given by anyone else, was of enormous advantage to Crespi’.
In Naples the lawyers who played such a vital role in the cultural life of the city were especially prominent in their support of the arts. Above all there was Giuseppe
Valletta, poet and arbiter of taste, friend of Shaftesbury and the patron of Luca Giordano and Solimena.3
However, all these men—and there were countless more like them—crucial as their support was for the very survival of painting in Italy, could not possibly create the climate that had been established by families like the Barberini and their circle in Rome.
With the general collapse of Italy under foreign domination and, ironically enough, with the peace that followed, all these cities with the possible exception of Venice remained essentially provincial. Between about 1600 and 1670 Rome was in fact the only ‘capital’ of Italy that could compete in prestige with the main towns in the nation states of Europe. At the beginning of the eighteenth century the wars which engulfed
Italy, the vast increase in foreign travel, the decline of Spain, and then the reforms of enlightened despots helped to revive the cosmopolitan importance of some of the Italian city states. During most of the seventeenth century, however, the extravagant but somewhat unimaginative nobility and professional classes certainly kept alive local schools of painting of great value, but their isolation and the very vigour of individual traditions inevitably led to a stagnation of taste. Whereas the great Roman collections had included pictures by artists from all over Italy, and even Europe, and had thus stimulated a wide range of appreciation and new combinations of artistic sensibility— such as the classical-Venetian synthesis of Cassiano dal Pozzo and his circle—it was rare in Bologna to find a picture by a contemporary Neapolitan painter, or in Genoa to find one by a Venetian. Rare—but not impossible; for, in fact, stagnation was averted hot only by foreign intervention (as has already been pointed out) but also by a few patrons within Italy itself, either expatriates or citizens, who-looked beyond their native towns and included within their collections works by foreign artists.

[Page 205]
By far the most important and influential of all such patrons was the Flemish merchant Gaspar Roomer.1 He was born of a good family in Antwerp towards the end of the sixteenth century and by 1634 he had already been long settled in Naples and was the owner of an outstanding picture gallery. Some years later his activities as shipowner and trader had won him a fortune valued at five million ducats. His ships ranged as far afield as Scandinavia" and Egypt, but most of his business was carried on with his native
Low Countries. He lent money to the viceroys and even to the King of Spain, and in a city where titles and the feudal virtues counted more than anywhere else in Italy this rich foreign upstart entertained half the nobility—at first in his palace in Via Monteoliveto and later in the Palazzo della Stella or in one of his many country houses. The strength ofliis religious convictions and his especial devotion to the Carmelites were shown by spectacular donations to their churches and the entry of his only daughter into one of their convents. During the revolt of Masaniello in 1647 Roomer naturally found himself in some danger—but luckily for him the public memory of his past generosity to some working men living near his palace, combined with his readiness to bribe their present leaders, saved him from the fate which befell others less cautious or less benevolent. He lived on, respected and successful, for another twenty-six years (recovering from the plague in 1656) and died, a very old man, in 1674. He left behind a vast fortune, most of which he bequeathed to charity, over 1500 paintings, which were quickly dispersed, and the proverb ‘Do you take me for a Roomer?’ with which to counter persistent borrowers.
Like many a Fleming devoted to the pleasures of life Roomer had a taste for the grotesque, the dark and the cruel which the painters of Naples were well able to satisfy.
Over the years he collected a grim series of works by Ribera: The Drunken Silenus— a gross, dirty, fat-paunched, androgynous travesty of the god of wine lying obscenely across the picture attended by his goat-like fauns and a braying donkey, the very embodiment of harsh stupidity (Plate 32a)2; there was too The Flaying of Marsyas, who lies with his torn, naked limbs outstretched under Apollo’s knee like some parody of the crucified body of St Peter while the satyrs gaze in anguish at his torments3; and Sandrart recalled seeing a Cato ‘who lies in his own welling blood after committing suicide and tears his intestines into pieces with his hands’.4
In fact, Roomer was especially fond of the Caravaggists: besides his seven Riberas, heowned three paintings each by Caracciolo, the young Massimo Stanzione and Carlo

[Page 206]
Saraceni; and he also acquired pictures by the Frenchmen Valentin and Simon Vouet and the Dutch David de Haen. War, too, appealed to him when it could be looked at safely as a picturesque muddle and required no active participation—his narrow escape from Masaniello surely confirmed the advantages of non-commitment—and he was particularly fond of the young Aniello Falcone who painted for him a number of lively
‘battle scenes without a hero’.1 -
But, above all, Roomer liked the small landscapes and storms at sea, the animals and still Eves with fruit and game piling up on the table, that were the special subjects of his native Flemish painters, many of whom settled for a time in Rome. He was particularly proud of these—‘as all the pictures are very sine’, he wrote, ‘and as most of them are by foreign artists, unfamiliar to Neapolitan painters, I want foreign painters to be summoned to draw up the inventory; especially the painter Jan Vandeneynde of
Brussels and others whom he chooses’—and he owned several hundreds by Paul Brill,
Peter de Witte, Velvet Breughel, Leonard Bramer, Jacques Duyvelant, Cornelius
Poelenburgh, Corneille Schut, Gioffredo Wals, Gerard van dor Bos and many others.
Images of plenty and wild fertility, the landscapes and produce of his distant birthplace mingled with the cruelty and lusts of his adopted home. What was missing was just what was most characteristic of Roman painting at the time: the clarity and serenity which classical discipline had imposed on Venetian colour. It is perhaps characteristic of Roomer’s lack of intellectual interests that almost the only old masters in his collection were eight animal pieces by Bassano.
Such was Roomer’s gallery in his early days in Naples-—thereafter, although he went on buying hundreds of pictures, we have much less information about their nature, and have to rely on a variety of indirect sources. We know that all this time he was keenly trading in pictures as well as in other goods—sending Neapolitan paintings to the Low Countries (notably those of Ribera’s pupil, Bartolommeo Passante) and, presumably, receiving in exchange works by his fellow-countrymen, though his two
Van Dycks—a Susanna and the Elders and a St Sebastian—were probably acquired locally. In about 1640 one of the most important of all his pictures reached his palace—
Rubens’s large Feast of Herod, a work of the artist’s full maturity painted probably some half a dozen years earlier (Plate 35b).2 It caused a great impact in Naples, for it was quite unlike anything that had hitherto been seen in Roomer’s gallery. The feast takes place in a crowded, stifling room full of luxury and extravagance while richly dressed guests, a boy with a monkey and negro servants all look on. In the foreground a tall, blowsy girl holds the severed head of John the Baptist on a silver plate, and the daughter of Herodias, with a strange, flirtatious expression, makes ready to stab the offending tongue with a fork—a touch of cruelty that must have appealed to Roomer.
Only Herod, seated at the head of the table, with his chin cupped in his hand, looks anxiously aware that a terrible injustice has been done.

[Page 207]
The pageantry and colour of Rubens’s great picture may either have stimulated or coincided with a certain taste on Roomer’s part for paintings less ‘realistic’ in subjectmatter or treatment than those that had hitherto formed the bulk of his collection. It seems probable that through his Flemish agents in Pome and elsewhere he commissioned and bought pictures from Guercino, Giacinto Brandi (who painted an altarpiece for his private chapel dedicated to S. Maria Maddalena dei Pazzi) and Sacchi; he was, however, just as keen to obtain works by the animal specialist Castiglione and by bamboccianti and battle painters such as Pieter van Laer, Jan Miel and Borgognone.1 And during the last ten years of his life he made strenuous efforts to acquire architectural scenes by Viviano Codazzi.
When Mattia Preti returned to Naples in 1656 Roomer commissioned a picture from him and left the subject to the artist, who chose the Marriage Feast at Cana: it was a rich, colourful scene set in an open loggia which deliberately looked back to Veronese.
The picture attracted attention in Naples, but Roomer himself seems to have acquired further works by Preti only to export them.
Roomer’s relations with Luca Giordano, who was some forty years younger than himself, began in the middle 1650s on an uneasy note... The painter resented ‘being treated as a beginner’, and apparently forged a number of old masters both to prove his
’ virtuosity and to tease the ageing collector. He was forgiven and thereafter Roomer became his staunch supporter in the many envious feuds which the prodigiously successful artist inspired. Unfortunately it is impossible to tell what pictures Giordano painted for him. Were they in the new, light, rich, Venetian manner that the artist was already practising long before Roomer’s death in 1674, or did they carry on for him the tradition of violence which he had so fostered in the early years of his collecting?
In fact our scanty knowledge of Roomer’s patronage during the last forty years of his Use makes it very difficult for us to understand his place in Neapolitan culture. It was unquestionably of great importance. He was held to be the richest man in Naples and his collection of pictures was certainly the largest in the city. Above all it was permanent
—for the Spanish viceroys, the only rivals to Roomer in the claims they made on painters, were always changing. ‘All picture lovers of the day followed his advice’, wrote de Dominici more than fifty years after Roomer’s death.2 But what was his advice? From the same source—our only one-—we hear of him praising Mattia Preti
- on their first meeting for his ‘maniera grande which was firmly based on drawing, on nature and on chiaroscuro’. Can it be that he was disappointed in the ‘Venetian’ picture

[Page 208]
which Prcti then painted for him and that because of this he thereafter commissioned nothing for himself from the artist? We" know too little to say, but it is interesting that he chided Luca Giordano ‘for his new manner which was contrary to those of good artists’.1 Did this new manner He in the loose brushstrokes and lighter tonahty adopted by the painter which offended other connoisseurs also? Roomer’s rebuke was certainly not in the name of classicism—for we hear that he later backed Giordano against
Francesco di Maria ‘who was a great draughtsman but a weak colourist’. In fact, it was naturalism that seems to have been Roomer’s greatest love from his earliest days when his gallery contained little else until the end of his life when he was so keen to acquire works by Codazzi,2 when Jean-Baptiste de Wael dedicated to him a set of prints showing scenes from peasant Use,3 and when he was in touch with Ruoppolo, whose still lives he sent to Flanders.
His gallery crystafosed that close relationship which had for so long existed between the cultures of the South and North of Europe. The Flemish still Eves must have excited many of the Neapolitan painters in this genre who would otherwise have had little chance to see such work—and they repaid their debt with pictures of superb quality; and Rubens’s Feast of Herod was certainly a source of inspiration to many artists breaking away from the Caravaggism of the early years of the century, whatever Roomer himself may have felt about the trend. ‘The magic of its brilliant colouring laid on with such mastery’ profoundly affected Bernardo CavaUino, we learn from de Dominici, and many other painters also studied this seminal picture.4
Closely associated with Roomer as patron were his business partners Jan and
Ferdinand van den Einden. Jan van den Einden was also Flemish though, unlike Roomer, his origins seem to have been lowly.5 After some early struggles his partnership with
Roomer which began in the 1630s led to his enrichment, and his fortune was inherited by his son Ferdinand, who was thus able to buy himself the title of Marquis and to acquire a vast collection of pictures. His taste seems to have been largely modelled on that of Gaspar Roomer, seventy of whose pictures he inherited. But, being of a younger generation, it was the later painters, inspired by the Venetians, whom he specially patronised. Thus he was so struck by Mattia Preti’s Marriage at Cana and the general approval it met with that he ordered several very large pictures by that artist. But the subjects of three of these, The Crucifixion of St Peter, The Beheading of St Paul and The
Martyrdom of St Bartholomew, show that Van den Einden must have shared Roomer’s taste for brutal realism.8 He was also a keen admirer of Luca Giordano,7 but unfortunately we do not know which pictures by that artist he possessed.

[Page 209]
There was another exceptionally far-ranging patron living in South Italy at this time. Don Antonio Ruffo was born in Messina in 1610 of one of the great aristocratic families.1 This did not prevent him engaging in trade, and his income was still further increased by the vast revenues he drew from taxes on grain, silk and other vital goods.
He played a limited part in what little political activity was permitted the nobility under
Spanish rule, and in 1661 he was outlawed for a short time for supporting the privileges of his native city against the authority of the Viceroy. But most of his Use was devoted to patronage of the arts and his palace in Messina became the centre of cultural life there until his death in 1678. At that time it contained more than 350 pictures painted by artists all over Italy and even elsewhere.
Ruffo began collecting in about 1646 shortly after moving into the palace in the
Strada Emnianuela which his mother, the Duchess of Bagnara, had built for him. He continued almost without interruption for the next thirty years. A good deal of evidence makes it clear beyond doubt that he took a great personal interest in the works that he ordered, and yet it is an astonishing fact that his acquaintance with any paintings other than his own must have been negligible. He seems never to have travelled beyond
Calabria, and he heard about the leading painters in Italy and elsewhere entirely through agents. Everyone was pressed into acting for him in this capacity: his family, his friends, the artists he employed and picture dealers. From them he was informed who were the more talented artists at work—for he was primarily interested in his contemporaries— and what was the state of the market. He then wrote to the artists directly or through his agents to order the pictures he required, sometimes with instructions as to the subject, at others leaving the painter a free hand. He was guided by two considerations: size and expense. His pictures were arranged according to a symmetrical pattern, and he was often anxious to make up pairs—either from the same artist or two different ones, and this concern naturally involved the actual composition. Thus Guercino asked for a rough drawing of Rembrandt’s Aristotle contemplating the Bust of Homer (now in the
Metropolitan Museum, New York) which his own picture was required to match. In general, Ruffo seems to have decided in advance the price he wished to pay for each work, and this too affected the structure of the pictures painted for him. As Guercino, for instance, had a fixed rate of 125 ducats for each figure, when Ruffo offered him a hundred scudi for a picture, the artist wrote that he would be prepared to paint ‘a little more than halfa figure’. Later Ruffo raised the sum to 100 ducats, and Guercino answered that he would ‘paint something to your satisfaction proportionate to the amount of money that you are offering-me’.
When the first picture by an artist reached Ruffo in Messina he could decide whether he wanted more by the same man; and in the absence of his own letters and instructions, the number of works by each painter in his gallery helps to give us some clues as to his taste. Above all he was obviously trying to amass a representative collection

[Page 210]
of works by all the leading contemporaries—‘non si può dire infermità il desiderate quadri di Pittori famosi’, his agent wrote to him—and it was probably this motive that led him to make his most remarkable and magnificent purchases, the three pictures by Rembrandt—Aristotle contemplating the Bust of Homer (Plate 35a), Alexander the Great and The Blind Homer—bought over a period of a dozen years. Rembrandt was fairly well known but not widely appreciated in Italy (except for his etchings), and Russo’s
Flemish agent in Rome Abram Breughel was probably not being insincere (as has been suggested) when he wrote in 1665 that ‘the pictures of Rembrandt are not very highly thought of here’. Indeed Russo himself found the free brush strokes of the great master’s last period unacceptable and sent back The Blind Homer ‘to be completed’. Despite this it is obvious that he greatly admired Rembrandt, and that he was comparatively unaffected by the classicist doctrines that gained such force in Rome during the second half of the-seventeenth century. He deliberately asked Guercino to paint the picture " which was to match Rembrandt’s Aristotle in his ‘prima maniera gagliarda’, and although this was for a particular purpose, at other times too he made special efforts to obtain examples of this artist’s early and more robust style. Guercino, indeed, seems to have been among his favourites for he owned seven of his pictures compared to only one each by Sacchi and Maratta. Salvator Rosa, Giacinto Brandi and Michelangelo
Cerquozzi were others among those working in Rome who especially appealed to him, but naturally the Neapolitans and South Italians were those best represented in his gallery—seven pictures by Novelli, twelve each by Ribera and Andrea Vaccaro and nine by Stanzione, though most of these were inherited from his brother. Religious subjects have a clear majority over all others, but he also collected flower pictures (more than a dozen painted by his Flemish agent Abram Breughel alone), landscapes and other themes of all kinds. Of old masters Russo showed a special interest in Polidoro da
Caravaggio; he. also owned a collection of prints which included 189 by Rembrandt.
The astonishing number of pictures he had assembled was gradually dispersed after his death, and only a few of them can now be traced. But even in its heyday Russo’s gallery must have been an isolated one, a stronghold of European culture in the backwater of the crumbling Spanish empire, whose reputation undoubtedly stimulated those artists who worked for him but which was of little significance in any wider context, though
Ruffo tried hard to obtain public commissions in Messina for Guercino and Mattia
Preti.
But Neapolitan painting spread far beyond the frontiers of the Spanish empire.
Indeed, one of the characteristics of this phase in Italian patronage, when the absolute supremacy of Rome was being challenged in various provincial centres, is the international prestige acquired by Neapolitan artists. Even in Florence, a city as far removed as any in Italy from the spirit and traditions of Naples, there existed patrons whose enthusiastic appreciation of Neapolitan art was responsible for vitally important commissions. The principal outpost of this appreciation was to be found in a fine house, set in a beautiful garden with fountains and statues, in the Via Chiara near the church of
S. Maria Novella. It was inhabited by three brothers, Andrea, Lorenzo and Ottavio

[Page 211]
del Rosso, who were among the most notable collectors of their dayd They sprang from a family of rich merchants which throughout the previous century had been laboriously engaged in worming its way up to the centres of power and prestige. Money had opened all the doors: first, Florentine citizenship and admission to the recently founded chivalrous order of the Cavalieri di Santo Stefano; then a series of ingenious marriage alliances with the best families; and, finally, as a logical development, an increasing number of dignities and official posts. Andrea, the eldest of the brothers, who was born in 1640, was at the age of 36 awarded the lucrative flour monopoly which he shared with the slightly younger Lorenzo.2 Both men later became Senators, and Andrea eventually died in Rome, where he frequently lent pictures to the exhibitions at S.
Salvatore in Lauro, as director-general of the papal postal services. Ottavio entered the
Church and became Bjshop of Volterra, where he lived in ‘concetto di straordinaria bontà’;
In their earlier days the brothers clearly travelled a great deal, for among the pictures recorded in their collection are ‘two modern ones on glass’ from Mainz and two ‘by Albert Diirer bought by me in Cologne’. Inevitably, like Gaspar Roomer and so many other businessmen, their trading and patronage were closely connected: we hear of them sending Carlo Dolci’s little Flight into Egypt to Lord Exeter in England3 and another picture as far as Poland,
We can best appreciate the novelty of their patronage if we compare it with that of their immediate forebears. In 1642, two years before his death, their grandfather
Very brief accounts of the careers of Andrea and Ottavio are given by Giuseppe Manini and Salvino
Salvini. -
The wills of Lorenzo and Ottavio are in the Archivio di Stato—Protocolli del notaio Nicola Taddei,
24,253, Testamenti and Protocolli del notaio Niccolo Salvetti, Testamenti, 23,516—but they are of no great interest and do not refer to pictures except for a bequest by Lorenzo to ‘Priore Coriolano Montemagni
Segretario di Stato di S.A.R. di un Quadro di mano del Caravaggio di Larghezza braccia due con l’ornamento, et Altezza braccia uno, e due terzi incirca dipintovi fra l’altro S. Gio. Decollato.’
Andrea’s artistic activities in Rome are referred to in Giuseppe Ghezzi’s notes (see p. 125, note 1) and'ih two letters from Sebastiano Resta to Francesco Gabburri published by Bottari, II, pp. 100 and 104.
Ottavio died in 1714, Andrea in 1715 and Lorenzo in 1719. The heirs were the two sons, Antonio and Giovanni Battista, of a fourth brother Nicola who died in 1710.

[Page 212]
Andrea had had built in the Theatine church of S. Gaetano a sumptuous family chapel dedicated to his name-saint. This was decorated with frescoes by Ottavio Vannini, who himself died a year later leaving the altar picture to be completed by a pupil.1
Vannini was, indeed, the family painter: the four large scenes from the Old Testament—
The Sacrifice of Isaac, The Fall of Manna, Moses striking the Rock and Susanna and the Elders—which he produced for the house were considered his finest works,2 and the del Rosso also owned a large number of other pictures by him, mainly of saints. He was a methodical, correct, academic artist in the true tradition of Florentine ‘disegno’— characteristic in every way of the provincial backwater into which one section of that city’s painting had sunk during the first half of the seventeenth century.
It was into this peaceful, somewhat pietistic household—Carlo Dolci also painted for the del Rosso family3—that the new generation introduced over a hundred Neapolitan pictures (some acquired from the Roomer collection after its dispersal in 1674), of which more than sixty were by Luca Giordano. Aesthetic taste alone is unlikely to have caused such a spectacular departure from traditional patterns; business connections were probably of greater importance. Indeed, various links with Naples turn up from time to time in the family history. In 1613, for instance, we find the Grand Duke of
Tuscany writing to the Spanish Viceroy about some subjects of his, ‘the sons and heirs ' of Antonio del Rosso, Florentines, but living and trading in Naples’,4 and it is perfectly possible that Andrea and Lorenzo themselves may have started their careers in that city.
But however the connection began, it led to striking results.
Luca Giordano was their principal artistic agent in Naples and their relationship with him was particularly close. Many of their pictures were acquired through him, and when he came to Florence in 1679 he stayed at their house.5 Indeed, as they already owned a number of his works before then, it may well have been they who arranged for him to be given.the commission to paint the Corsini chapel in the Carmine, which in turn led to his great frescoes in the Palazzo Riccardi. Certainly they owned the original bozzetto for one of the pendentives in the chapel.
Luca Giordano’s paintings for the brothers were of various kinds and included a large number of erotic works—many versions of the theme of Venus and Amor, one

[Page 213]
os which showed in the distance an ‘ignudo in atto assai lussurioso che si strugge per lui’, and sets of fables—Deianira and Nessus, Galatea and Tritons, The Rape of Proserpina. But they also owned religious paintings by him with scenes from the Old and New Testaments, as well as more purely devotional pictures; and they showed a particular fondness for Giordano’s modelli for altarpieces and other works.
This new appreciation of the sketchy, the unfinished, lively brush stroke, which was to be so important in eighteenth-century art and was to have another great Florentine devotee in the Grand Prince Ferdinand de’ Medici, may have led to their collecting (through the intervention of Luca Giordano) the work of another artist of the Neapolitan school who has acquired enormous popularity in our own day. This was the
Frenchman François Nome, generally known as ‘Monsù Desiderio’, and described in their inventory as ‘Lorenese’. They owned eleven of his mannered, visionary ruin pictures ‘fatta di colpi’, including a Babylon, an ‘antichità di palazzi’, a ‘gran Tempio antico’, a Temple of Solomon and an imaginary view of Venice. And the same taste for the Mannerist is shown in their possession of what was apparently the original plate for
Callot’s print of La Fiera dellTmpruneta.
As an isolated phenomenon the del Rosso collection with its great emphasis on
Naples and its total neglect of Rome is of outstanding interest.1 Whatever its motives, their sudden conversion from the Florentine tradition of ‘disegno’ to the values of
‘colore’ was symptomatic of the most advanced international taste towards the end of the seventeenth century on the verge of the great Venetian revival. But it is difficult to assess how far the collection represented something more important—a direct and influential contribution to the cultural life of Florence. If it was through del Rosso that Luca Giordano was commissioned to decorate the Corsini chapel in the Carmine and the ceiling of the Palazzo Riccardi, we can certainly claim such an influence for the brothers. These works, though they had disappointingly little effect on Florentine painting, were of crucial importance to central Italy, and in their own right they rank among the masterpieces of the century. Yet there are aspects of the del Rosso brothers’ taste which are curiously puzzling. There was, for instance, in Florence only one artist whose freshness and vitality could surely have satisfied the friends and patrons of Luca
Giordano. Yet Livio Mehus they largely ignored. In 1677 they owned three pictures by him; twelve years later these had disappeared. Somewhere, at the back of the mind, there persists the disturbing belief that their special patronage of Luca Giordano may have Been dictated more by financial interests than by aesthetic taste.
The importance that Neapolitan painting had acquired all over Italy towards the end of the seventeenth century is shown by the collections of other patrons who looked beyond their native cities. Thus in Genoa the Marchese Girolamo Durazzo, a member
. of one of the leading patrician families which over the centuries had built up an extensive collection of local art, turned not only to Bologna for many of his pictures (as was

[Page 214]
usual enough),1 but also to Naples. Luca Giordano painted four canvases for the family
—one scene from Tasso (Sophronia and Olindo), one from Roman history (The Death of Seneca), one from the Old Testament (Queen Jezebel torn to pieces by Dogs) and one from mythology (Perseus and Andromeda).2 And, in about 1704, Francesco Solimena added two further vast histories from the Old Testament-Judith with the Head of
Holofernes and Deborah and Barach.3 Pictures by the same two artists hung together in one other important collection outside Naples, that of the Baglioni in Venice, a family of rich publishers who early in the eighteenth century bought their way into the nobility. They showed a great interest in Neapolitan art, for besides pictures by Mattia
Preti they owned several by Luca Giordano and two by Solimena—Jacob and Rebecca and Rebecca and Eliezer4—whose influence on Pittoni and the young Tiepolo was considerable.

**Footnotes:**
1 Zanotti, II, p. 3 5, and L. Crespi, pp. 204 and 244.
2 See especially The Marriage at Cana of about 1686, now in Chicago, which shows the impact of Veronese and Barocci—van der Rohe, pp. 6-9.
3 De Dominici, IV, p. 141, and Bologna, pp. 181 and 203. Valletta used to help Luca Giordano with his problems of iconography (de Dominici, IV, p. 196) and bought from another collector a number of architectural paintings by Codazzi with figures by Cerquozzi and Micco Spadaro (ibid., Ill, p. 421).
1 Except where specifically mentioned, all the information given here about Gaspar Roomer comes from the two excellent articles by Ceci and de Vaes (1925). These include quotations from and references to all the available first-hand sources—Sandrart, Capaccio, Celano, de Dominici, etc.
2 Although this painting now at Capodimonte is dated 1626 it is not referred to in Capaccio’s list of the pictures in Roomer’s house in 1634; but Palomino (III, p. 311) describes it and says that it was painted for him. SeeTrapier, p. 36.
3 The picture of this subject now in the Museo di S. Martino, on which this description is based, cannot be the actual one owned by Roomer as it is dated 1637 and Capaccio refers to a painting of the subject as being in his house in 1634—Trapier, p. 133, and Ville sur-Yllon, p. 147.
4 Trapier, p. 230. There is also a print by Sebastiano Marcotti of St Januatius by Ribera, dated 1665 and dedicated to Roomer . . . affetti:mo della pittura e divot:o del Santo . ..'
1 For Falcone’s relations with Roomer, see Saxl, p. 80.
2 For the history of this picture, now in the National Gallery of Scotland, see L. Burchard, pp. 383— 387.
1 When Roomer died he left seventy of his pictures to Ferdinand van den Einden, the son of his business associate Jan. Van den Einden, who himself had a fine collection, imturn left a third of his pictures to each of his three daughters. One of these married Don Giuliano Colonna, and in 1688 the inventory of their collection was drawn up by Luca Giordano (Ferdinando Colonna, pp. 29-32). There are good—but not conclusive—grounds for believing that many of these paintings must have come from Van den Einden —and originally from Roomer. Indeed we know that the two pictures by Codazzi with figures by Micco Spadaro of The Pool of Bethesda and The Woman taken in Adultery did pass through the three collections in just this way (de Dominici, III, pp. 421-2). Unfortunately evidence as regards other pictures in the Colonna collection is lacking, and I cannot accept Vaes’s certainty about their provenance.
2 De Dominici, IV, p. 47.
1 De Dominici, IV, p. 131: ‘gli fece una lunga esortazione a lasciar la nuova maniera, la quale dicea esser contra rune quelle usate da’ valentuomini . . .'.
2 Ruffo, p. 176.
3 Bartsch, V, pp. 5-10. There is a set tn the British Museum.
4 For the influence of this picture see Bologna, p. 20.
5 Vaes, 1925, p. 185.
6 De Dominici, IV, pp. 48-9.
7 ibid, p. 140.
1 For all this section see the admirable and fully documented account by Vincenzo Russo. For Russo’s relations with Rembrandt see also Slivc, pp. 59 ff.
1 The main sources for the collection of the del Rosso brothers are the account given of it in 1677 by Cinelli and the complete inventory drawn up twelve years later by Andrea del Rosso himself published in Gualandi, II, pp. 113-28. Both these documents provide a certain amount of incidental biographical information. To supplement these I have drawn heavily on a number of published and manuscript sources in Florentine archives and libraries. I am most grateful to Dottoressa Paola Zambelli of the Archivio di Stato for her help. ' ’ General information about the family and genealogies exist in the manuscript collections of Passerini in the Biblioteca Nazionale—in particular, Passerini 19(25): Informazione sopra la Nobiltà della Famiglia del Rosso di Firenze mandata a i SStri Falconieri di Roma, da me GiotBatta Dei, quest’anno 1747. There are also a number of references drawn from a variety of sources in the Poligrafo Gargano in the same library.
2 A copy of the decree conferring the Appalto Generale della rendita della Farine della Città, e Dominio di Firenze for nine years as from I June 1676 is preserved in the Archivio di Stato—Miscellanea Medicea 533, Uffizio delle Farine, and some information about its functioning can be found elsewhere in the same collection of documents.
8 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 500. This picture, which is still at Burghley, was exhibited in London in i960—Italian Art and Britain, p. 24.
1 Richa, III, p. 215.
2 Cinelli, p. 163, and Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 145. Two of the pictures—The Fäll of Manna and Moses striking the Rock—are published by R. Longhi, 1956, in an article on the del Rosso collection.
3 They owned three pictures by Carlo Dolci—including the Flight into Egypt sold to Lord Exeter— and four by Giovanni Bilivert. All these were of religious subjects. They also owned altarpieces by Pietro da Cortona and Ciro Ferri. Pietro da Cortona’s Madonna and Four Saints—a smaller version of the early picture in S. Agostino, Cortona—was obtained for them in-Naples by Luca Giordano—Gualandi, II, p. 122, and Mostra di Pietro da Cortona, p. 28.
4 Biblioteca Nazionale, Florence—Poligrafo Gargano.
5 Baldinucci, VI, 1728, p. 506. Senator Francesco Panciatichi, who from 1682 held the important post of Primo Segretario, was the father-in-law of Nicola del Rosso, the fourth brother. In the Archivio Mediceo (Filza 4123) is a letter to him from Naples, dated 2 April 1686: ‘Molto obbligantemente resto da V.S.IlLma favorito nel particolare della lettera del Sig.r V.Re diretta al Pittore Giordani, mentre oltre la briga presasi di fargliela sicuramente recapitare, s’è degnata anche d’assumersi il pensiero deviarmene la risposta, che già da me è stata presentata à S.E.
1 Besides those mentioned, they also owned pictures by Ribera, Preti and Paceco de Rosa—the latter are published by R. Longhi, 1956.
1 They owned large historical pictures by Giovan GiosefFo dal SHe and Francesco Monti (Zanotti, I, p. 299, and II, p. 120) and they summoned Giacomo Antonio Boni to decorate the rooms of their palace with mythological frescoes—Zanotti, H, p. 231, and Soprani, H, pp. 376-80.
8 ib d.. IV p. 428, and Bologna, pp. 89-90.
4 De Dominici, IV, pp. 87, 188 and 428, and Bologna, p. 164. Both Luca Giordano and Solimena had a number of admirers in Venice. Besides the Labia, who are discussed separately in Chapter 9, the Procuratore Canale, Flaminio Comer, the Giovanelli and the Widmann all owned pictures by one or other of them—de Dominici, IV, p. 428, and the engravings of Pietro Monaco published in 1763, Nos.