# 09 CHP-9 sec ii

During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries Venice maintained that independence from Rome that had long marked her policy—though financial necessity compelled her in 1657 to readmit the Jesuits in return for papal support. Within the State itself, however, the government insisted on a policy of religious orthodoxy that was as rigorous as anything that Rome could have desired—for it was a maxim,’held even by the sceptical, that religious and political dissent went hand injiand.6 There were doubts sometimes about the depth of Venetian piety; never about the lavishness with which
a See, for instance, the attitude of Casanova as described by A. Bozzôla.

[Page 268]
it was expressed.1 Such lavishness was natural enough, for throughout the seventeenth and first half of the eighteenth centuries the Church, and in particular the religious
Orders, were constantly growing in wealth, despite frequent and unsuccessful attempts by the State to stop this process. When in 1767 it was at last decided to forbid secular property passing into clerical ownership, it was discovered that although the clergy amounted to only two per cent of the population, the income from their land was almost equal to that of the rest of the Republic.2
And so the Church retained or even increased the position she had always held as the leading patron of-contemporary art in Venice. Of the history painters in the city virtually all devoted well over half their work to the Church, and in many cases the proportion was considerably higher. Of Cignaroli in Verona it was claimed that like
Barocci and Carlo Dolci (significant parallels) for years he painted almost nothing but saints,3 though many of these must have been for private devotional pictures. With its constant demand for altarpieces the Church provided a market for modern painting that was lacking elsewhere.
Clerics were excluded from holding political office, but in fact they were inextricably associated with the government, as all the great ecclesiastical posts were in the hands of the nobility who—as a traveller pointed out4—had no other outlet for their younger sons, trade being considered dishonourable. It is not therefore surprising that the decoration of churches reflected patrician ideals fully as much as that of their palaces.
Thus the haughtiness of the Virgin and Saints as seen by Piazzetta and Tiepolo, so different from most seventeenth-century religious painting, clearly shows the projection of aristocratic principles into sacred history.
Many nobles were, indeed, themselves directly responsible for the commissions involved and employed their own favourite artists in palace and church alike. Thus the
Manin offered in 1706 to decorate the choir, transept and High Altar of the Cathedral at Udine. They tried unsuccessfully in the face of rivalry to build the High Altar of the church of the Scalzi in Venice and later took over the decoration of one of the chapels there; finally they were responsible for building the façade and the High Altar of the
Jesuit church.5 Whenever they could they made use of the painter Louis Dorigny, who also decorated their villa at Passeriano.
Most of the religious Orders had very rich backers and they were consequently by far the most important patrons of modern painting and architecture in early eighteenth century Venice. ‘It is a disgrace’, wrote one observer in 1743,6 ‘that monks find vast

[Page 269]
sums to build their magnificent and splendid churches—such as the Jesuits and Dominicans, for instance—whereas the parishes only get the smallest help and have to wait for years and years before their churches are ready for use.’ The complaint was not wholly justified. Parish churches, such as S. Toma and S. Vitale, were either rebuilt or richly decorated with remarkable speed. So too was S. Matteo di Rialto, about which we hear that after ‘the priest had in 1735 collected alms from his parishioners and other pious people ... he renovated it within a few months.. A1 But it is true that for a period of about a quarter of a century after 1720 the churches of the Carmelites and Dominicans,
Oratorians and Capuchins were being filled with many of the most striking'paintings and frescoes of the day.
The Scalzi, for instance, a particularly strict off-shoot of the Carmelite Order, came to Venice in 1633.2 After some difficulties they became closely linked with many leading nobles and won special sympathy through their missionary work in the Peloponnese and their intimate association with the Venetian troops out there. Such was their popularity that their original church became much too small, and Longhena and
Sardi were employed to build a new one. Nobles quarrelled for the privilege of erecting the High Altar, and the façade, which cost 74,000 ducats, was paid for by a Conte
Cavazza, who had been admitted to the patriciate in 1653.3 Though it was widely praised as ‘the most magnificent frontage not just in Venice but possibly in the whole of Europe’,4 such luxury became embarrassing for an austere Order and in 1732 an anonymous pamphleteer was called upon to justify the expense.5 It was not true, he commented, that the money could have been better spent on relieving poverty. What about Christ and the ointment of Mary Magdalene? And St Peter’s in Rome and St
Mark’s in Venice? Worship of God was fully as important as looking after the poor. It was not true that such a rich church conflicted with the spirit of poverty associated with the Order. Their living-quarters were to be austere, but ‘the Tabernacle of God must be built with magnificence’. It was not true that the monastery had been despoiled to decorate the church. The condition of the monks had not changed during the years that the church was being built. In any case the monastery had no capital and it had no debts.
Benefactions had been considerable, and the Venetian public was too generous to withhold alms from the monks because of the luxury of their church. But the most interesting complaint that the writer had to answer concerned taste rather than morals.

[Page 270]
So much richness, it was protested, above all so much gold, was out of keeping with the rules of good architecture. And here he could do no more than counter with the Temple ofjerusalem, and the churches and palaces of Tuscany, Rome and Bologna. The complaint certainly had force, though it was not insisted on,- for the church was decorated in the full Baroque style of Roman grandeur and marked a break with the Palladian tradition which had always dominated ecclesiastical architecture in Venice and was soon to do so again. Rich families, old and new, employed Lazzarini, Bambini and Dorigny to supply pictures and frescoes. Above all Tiepolo was called in on several occasions to help with the decoration culminating in the superb ceiling fresco of 1745 which showed the Holy House of Nazareth being carried by angels to Loreto—a theme designed to celebrate a painting of the Madonna from the island of S. Maria di Nazareth which had been given to the Scalzi on their arrival in Venice.1
The patronage of their mother Order, the Carmelites, was fully as splendid. In 1708
Sebastiano Ricci frescoed one chapel in the church of the Carmini, and nearly half a century later his pupil Gaspare Diziani painted four large pictures for the same church.2
Tiepolo painted one of his earliest works, the Madonna del Carmelo, in about 1720 for a chapel belonging to the Order in the church of S. Aponal3; while twenty years later he produced some of his greatest masterpieces for them—the frescoes on the ceiling of the principal room in the Scuola Grande dei Carmini, the headquarters of an association of non-noble laymen and religious under the general inspiration of the Carmelites.4
Piazzetta painted his Judith with the Head of Holofernes for the same group, and many other leading painters were also employed by them.5 It was, incidentally, a Carmelite,
Padre Jacopo Pedozzi, Secretary General of the Order and a man ‘very highly thought of, especially by the Venetian nobikty’, who was one of the very first patrons of
Canaletto.8
Scarcely less imposing as patrons were the Dominicans, for whom between 1725 and 1727 Piazzetta painted his only frescoes, The Glory of St Dominic, in a chapel in the church of SS. Giovanni e Paolo. At much the same time another branch of the Order, the Gcsuati, were beginning to employ Giorgio Massari to build a complete new church on the Zattere, financed largely by public support, a fact that they too, like the Scalzi, were very keen to emphasise.7 When one visitor was taken round by one of the Gesuati fathers in 1742, he spent much time ‘looking at the sine interior of the new church, decorated with beautiful paintings and chiaroscuri on its brilliantly lit vault, with
Cl. VII, 1620): ‘Li RR.PP. Domenicani Osservanti sopra le Zattere hanno principiato a dirroccareportione del suo convento, et ivi fabbricare la nuova Chiesa sopra il modello di quella del Redentore.’

[Page 271]
sumptuous altars of marble in its seven chapels, with new seats in the choir and the floor entirely in marble; of the best architecture and proportions in the interior and an equally fine façade. And he told me that until now 120,000 ducats had been spent on it.
When I began to congratulate him on the extent of his funds, he told me that the whole of that vast sum had come entirely from alms.’1 The ceiling fresco of St Dominic instituting the Rosary was painted by Tiepolo between 1737 and 1739, during which years
Piazzetta produced an altarpiece of Three Dominican Saints: Vincent, Hyacinth and Lawrence. It was'not until 1748 that Tiepolo produced his own altarpiece of Saints Agnes,
Rosa and Catherine for which the contract had been signed in 1740.-A few years earlier
Sebastiano Ricci had painted the first of these series of Dominican Saints: Pope Pius V,
Thomas Aquinas and Vincent Ferrer—one of his last and most magnificent works.2
The note of exaltation and triumph was particularly suitable for a church that was at the centre of the most combative religious organisation in eighteenth-century Venice.
It was from the Gesuati and the adjoining monastery that Padre Daniele Concina poured out a stream of invective against the Jesuits that accentuated the already bitter rivalries between the two Orders and it was he who was among the first to suggest that the Society should be suppressed.3
The Oratorians also commissioned altarpieces in 1724 and 1732 from Piazzetta and Tiepolo for their new church of the Fava, and during the middle years of the century they employed other leading artists such as Balestra, Amigoni and Cignaroli.
Another Order, the Capuchins, reached the peak of their glory in 1734 when one of their number, Fra Francesco Antonio Correr, was made Patriarch of Venice.4 A few years later Tiepolo painted a canvas of St Helen finding the True Cross for the ceiling of their church at Castello.
This extraordinary prolongation of the Counter Reformation well into the eighteenth century, with the religious communities rivalling each other in the splendour of their commissions to the principal artists,5 is notable for the absence of the Order that had played such a conspicuous part at an earlier stage in the movement—the Jesuits.
This is not altogether surprising, for by the very nature of their absolute subjection to the papacy, the Society had never been popular in Venice.6 Reluctantly readmitted in
1657 after some fifty years of exile, only after another half-century did the Jesuits begin to build a vast new church. Their resources, like those of many other Orders, came mostly from the exceedingly rich, but only recently ennobled, Manin family. When, years later, the Jesuits were under bitter attack in Venice, it was specially mentioned in

[Page 272]
a hostile pamphlet that ‘they had managed to extract from a single family the enormous expense of their magnificent church’.1 In fact, they were merely following a general precedent, but although both the exterior and the interior with its fantastically rich coloured marbles are as splendid as any in Venice and indeed were claimed to put all others in the shade,2 the church, dedicated to the Assumption of the Virgin, remains geographically and artistically isolated from those of the other religious Orders. None of the leading painters left work there,3 and Fontebasso, who frescoed the ceiling, depicted on it The Three Angels visiting Abraham, which had no specific relationship to
Jesuit iconography, and Elijah carried to Heaven in a Chariot of Fire, a subject hitherto associated almost exclusively with the Carmelites.4 Though the Jesuit saints appeared in one or two of the altarpieces, they were given no prominence and the general effect of the church is one of very great wealth but absolute anonymity. The contrast with the Dominicans could scarcely be greater: in S. Maria del Rosario every painting celebrates the triumph and glory of the Order; its great saints, painted in threes by the finest contemporary artists, all lead up to the climax of the ceiling where St Dominic himself is shown instituting the Rosary, hi Santa Maria Assunta we are scarcely aware of the Jesuits, whose presence is felt only through the foreignness of the style.
One other wholly new church was erected and splendidly decorated during the first half of the eighteenth century—the Pietà.5 The original foundation dated back to the fourteenth century when a refuge on the site had been established for exposed children and orphans, and it had soon come under the direct patronage of the Doge and
Senate. The first stone was therefore laid by Doge Grimani when in 1745 it was decided to rebuild the church and by 1760 it was described in the Gazzetta Veneta as being nearly completed ‘and one of the richest and most beautiful works of modern architecture’.
This was true enough, but the effect of grandeur was only achieved after difficulties which reveal the pitiful state into which official patronage of the arts had now sunk compared to that sponsored by private families and religious Orders. The Governors of the Pietà were in a position to draw on all the leading artists in Venice—but not to pay them. Massari was the architect and he commented rather ruefully on the conservative pressures which compelled him to work on orthodox Palladian Unes.6 He would, no doubt, have been still more rueful had he known at the time of this complaint that the façade would not be completed for 150 years. Tiepolo painted one of his most striking works—a Triumph of the Faith—on the oval dome between 1754 and 1755,
Professor Wilde (Italian Art and Britain, i960, p. 170) has very plausibly suggested that this was painted for the canonisation of the saint in 1726 and was probably intended as the sketch for an altarpiece which was never carried out. There is certainly no evidence that this altarpiece, if really planned, was for the
Jesuit church in Venice.

[Page 273]
but although he was paid 500 zecchini for this, two years later he himself was lending the Governors of the church 6000 ducats (about three times as much) to help with its further decoration.1 Five altar pictures were painted by the leading artists of Piazzetta’s school, but they were paid for by private donations.2
The paintings in all these churches vary in kind—the Dominicans and Carmelites concentrate more on the exaltation of their Orders, the Oratorians seem to.have encouraged a mystical ecstasy and, in Tiepolo’s Education os the Virgin, an unusual tenderness— both qualities more familiar in certain Roman paintings of the early seventeenth century.
But these are matters of emphasis rather than of rigorous consistency. In alhthere is a dominant note of triumph and an avoidance of cruelty or morbidity. Tiepolo’s Madonna del Carmelo does not show the purgatorial fires, in much the same way that some years later Sebastiano Ricci was asked by his patron Conte Tassis of Bergamo not to show them in a picture of the same subject; Piazzetta even removes the skull that he had included in the preliminary version of St Philip Neri and the Virgin.3
It is difficult to say how much control was exerted over the artist in such matters.
The Scuola del Carmine, about whose patronage we know most, showed extreme determination in securing the greatest artist of the day, Tiepolo: they put moral pressure on him and suggested that he should give precedence to religious over secular commissions.4 They then asked his advice about the decoration of the main room and left the choice of subject to him. Tiepolo proposed two alternatives. In each case the central panel in the ceiling was to show the Virgin, with the prophets Elijah and Elisha surrounded by angels, handing the scapular to St Simeon Stock. According to the first scheme, this canvas was to be surrounded by eight others illustrating ‘the privileges enjoyed by the Confraternity—that is to say the hope that the Brethren have of being saved from damnation through the intercession of the Virgin.’ These canvases would therefore represent various doctrinal points such as the rescue by angels of souls in purgatory. According to the second scheme, the surrounding canvases were to depict the virtues which should inspire the Brethren—‘Faith, Hope and Charity represented in the way everyone knows’ and a host of others. Tiepolo took his descriptions of these from the illustrations in Ripa’s standard iconographic Manual (a work he must have known by heart) and this second plan was chosen and carried out with a few modifications.
For the further decoration of the Scuola the governors organised a competition in whichartists were invited to submit schemes.5 The painter Gaetano Zompini, whose idea was accepted, put forward an iconographical proposal of some complexity drawn,

[Page 274]
so he claimed, from a reading of the Church fathers. This was to be a glorification of the Virgin, particularly as she was prefigured in the Old Testament—as Rebecca,
Abigail, Esther, Judith and the Mother of the Maccabees. Like Tiepolo, Zompini must certainly have taken clerical advice, though in fact such schemes were commonplace in earlier churches, and in 1743—some five years before the commission—we know that a Jesuit had preached ‘a fine panegyric of the Blessed Virgin, ingeniously comparing her to Esther’.1 In any case the long plans submitted by both artists show how rigorously programmes were adhered to well into the eighteenth century at a time when iconography is usually considered to be far more casual in inspiration. But they also show how much initiative was left to the artist. A similar practice seems to have been followed in the Pietà, where the governors were required ‘to seek plans from the most highly thought of painters with suitable ideas and choose the best’.2
We know of one patron of religious art in Venice who had decided views on the subject though he himself was not in fact a priest—through no fault of his own. Flaminio
Corner (Plate 48a) was born in 1693.3 So rigid was he, so unbending even with his friends, that Casanova himself had to admit that ‘sa reputation était sans tache’.4 He had been educated by the Jesuits and as a young man had wanted to enter a monastery.
But after the death of his parents and his elder brother he reluctantly agreed to marry so as to prevent the extinction of his family, one of the oldest in Venice. Most of his life was devoted to writing scholarly books in Latin about the early history of the Venetian churches; his palace, in which he assembled a prodigious quantity of relics, was frequented especially by the clergy and by the learned.5 He seems to have extended his patronage exclusively to religious paintings and sculpture, and he employed for these one artist especially—Giuseppe Angeli. The choice is interesting. Angeli was considered the best of Piazzetta’s pupils, and he imitated his master’s style long after the latter’s death in 1754, confining himself almost entirely to religious painting. In the process he sweetened it, gave it much more intimacy and emphasised the more sentimental elements which he developed into a pietestic mawkishness far removed from the pride and grandeur of Piazzetta’s own early paintings. In many ways he is closer to some of the
Counter Reformation artists of seventeenth-century Rome than the Venetian painters of his time. Flaminio Corner thought very highly of him and employed him on altarpieces in his parish church of S. Canciano as well as in S. Basilio, where he was one of a group of nobles devoted to propagating the cult of Beato Pietro Aconato, and in the
Pietà. For his own private devotions he commissioned from Angeli paintings of the
Four Evangelists, a series of the Apostles and various saints.

[Page 275]
Comer was also interested in the general problems of church architecture and decoration. He welcomed grandeur and is reported to have encouraged with advice, if not with money, the building of the great marble façades of S. Rocco and the Carita.
Indeed, he laid especial stress on the importance os 'marble, being anxious that it should replace stone in the altars of all Venetian churches. But though he admired richness, he deplored ‘the profane use of friezes as if in a theatre’ and above all he insisted on uniformity of decoration. All the altars in a church should be made of identical marble, should be of the same shape and the same size. ‘Harmony is delightful in everything’ was his creed, and he tried to put it into effect wherever he exfended his patronage. The most complete surviving example of the style he encouraged can be found in his parish church of S. Canciano. ‘These very altars which he had built with such decorum speak to you of him’, cried the priest at his funeral service in 1778/ and even today we can-still sense the powerful personality of the man as we gaze at the richness of black and blue-veined marble columns topped with gold Corinthian capitals, which are yet designed with a symmetry and strict austerity that make no concession to the more exuberant style so prevalent in contemporary Venetian churches.2
Chiesa non c’è di Preti, ed anche di alcuni Frati, che non abbia su d’un altare la sua Madonna o di Loreto o del Rosario, o del Carmine, e su di un banco un’altra, che siccome di forma più picciola, sembra eesere suo Figliuolo.’ The complaint is still more valid today than it was two hundred years ago.

**Footnotes:**
1 Thus [Etienne de Silhouette], I, p. 156: ‘Si le grand nombre et la magnificence des Eglises ne prouvent pas leur piété, ils prouvent au moins qu’ils veulent paroître en avoir.. ..'
2 Tabacco, p. 123. 3 Bevilacqua, p. 32.
4 Burney, I, p. 140.
5 Coggiola-Pittoni, 193 5, p. 304; L. Ferrari, 1882, p. 22, and Biblioteca Marciana, MS. Itai. Cl. VII, 1620—Libri di Memorie di Antonio Benigna'. ‘NN.HH. S. Ant.o e S. Nicolò Fratelli Co:Co:Manini ... a sue spese fatto erigere l’Aitar Maggiore [of the Jesuit Chuch] tutta la Incrostradura di Verde antico à rimesso per tutta la Chiesa, con li Organi, e Oratorij, Pavimento, con il Soffitto a Stucco dorato et la Facciata di Fuori... . .'—1729.
8 [Girolamo Zanetti]: 22 Maggio 1743—published, 1885, p. 129.
1 Corner, p. 163. Another parish church, S. Stae, was given a façade in 1709 from the proceeds ofa legacy of Doge Alvise Mocenigo; while a bourgeois, Andrea Stazio, left nearly 200 ducats for further building and decoration. Some of this was spent on pictures in the choir painted by a remarkable group of artists that included Piazzetta, Sebastiano Ricci and Tiepolo. Unfortunately, Stazio’s will in the Archivio di Stato (Sezione Notarile, Atti Giovanni Zon 1283:27) gives us no information about who actually commissioned these pictures.
2 L. Ferrari, 1882.
3 Bianchini, 1894, p. II.
4 Pôllnitz, II, p. 149.
5 Risposta ad un amico sopra certi riflessi falsamente concepiti contra la Chiesa dei Carmelitani Scalzi a Venezia—a pamphlet of 32 pages by M.A.—published by Luigi Pavini in 1734 (Marciana, Misc. 1135, n. 3) referred to by Ferrari, 1882.
1 Fogolari, 1931, pp. 18-32.
2 Lorenzetri, 1956, p. 551. -
8 Mostra del Tiepolo, 1951, p. 8. The picture is now in the Brera.
4 Documents for this commission are published by Urbani de Ghelthof, 1879, pp. IOO-17.
6 Lorenzetti, 1956, p. 553.
8 Letter of Alessandro Marchesini to Stefano Conti dated 11 August 1725 in Biblioteca Governativa, Lucca, and Zarzabini, p. 19.
7 [Girolamo Zanetti] wrote in 1743 that the Dominicans were still collecting alms all day long for the building of their church. It had been begun in 1725, when Benigna reported (Marciana, MS. Itai.
1 Letter from P. E. Gherardi to Muratori of 26 October 1742 in the Biblioteca Estense, Modena.
2 Arslan, in Rivista di Venezia, 1932, p. 19, and Lorenzetti, 1956, p. 30.
3 For a general discussion of Concina’s thought see Alberto Vecchi, i960. There are a large number of works by him in the British Museum.
4 Tentori, X, p. 288.
5 Among patrons of the older established Orders the Benedictines were especially active. Tiepolo, Pittoni, Ricci and Trevisani were all employed by the nuns of SS. Cosma e Damiano alia Giudecca.
6 Though Cardinal de Bernis (I, p. 421) said that in the 1740s the Jesuits were ‘dans le plus grand crédit’.
1 Appendice alla prima parte dei Monumenti Veneti in risposta alla lettera di un’uomo onesto, 1762.
2 See Pollnitz, II, p. 152.
3 [Count Seilern], 1959, No. 170, owns a modello for the Glory of S. Luigi Gonzaga, a Jesuit saint.
4 Mâle, p. 448. It had, however, been one of a whole series of Old Testament scenes prefiguring the Life of Christ painted by Rubens for the Jesuit Church at Antwerp.
5 Bosisio.
8 [Andrea Memmo], 1786, pp. 4 L.
1 Urbani de Ghelthof, pp. 124-6.
2 For instance, Pietro Foscarini left money in his will in 1745 for an ‘altare di marmo fine’ to be erected in the church—Biblioteca Correr, Cod. Cicogna, MMDCCCCXLV—2686.
3 The modello is in the Pennsylvania Museum.
4 See p. 270, note 4: ‘gli amorosi Confratelli sudetti continuarono con destri stimoli, e gli sort!, trattandosi del servitio di Maria Vergine, farle abbandonare hora Fimpegno di Milano, et accettare Topera di questa Scola . . .'. None the less Tiepolo went to Milan first to decorate the Palazzo Clerici.
5 Battistella, 1930, pp. 38 ff.
1 [Girolamo Zanetti]: 25 Marzo 1743 (published 1885, p. no).
2 Urbani de Ghelthof, p. 123.
3 For all the following see Don Anselmo Costadoni.
4 Casanova, IV, p. 246.
5 Biblioteca Correr—Cod. Gradenigo 185: 'Flaminio Corner, Senatore dedito alla Pietà, raccolse una quantità prodigiosa di Reliquie autentiche di Santi in modo che poteva ogni giorno dell’Anno esponete alla Veneratione quella che nel giorno stesso si apparteneva secondo il Rito di S. Chiesa.’
6 Pallucchini, 1931, pp. 421-32.
1 Don Giovanni Domenico Brustoloni, 1779. It is probable that the sentimental altar paintings by Bartolommeo Letterini were also commissioned by Corner.
2 Other people too protested about the excessive decoration of Venetian churches. On 20 February 1746 P. E. Gherardi wrote to Muratori (letter in Biblioteca Estense, Modena): ‘E cosa che ha del ridicolo il veder su gli altari davanti alle tavole o tele de’Santi dipinti, e di qua e là da i tabernacoli, statuette di Santi, fatte o di stucco o di legno, come appunto sarebbe in un suo puerile altarino un tenero fanciuletto.