# CHP-10



--- [Page 1] ---

Chapter io
FOREIGN INFLUENCES
- iSTATE, nobles and Church had been the traditional sources of-patronage and we
have seen how they operated during the first part of the eighteenth century. All
three tended to promote the ‘conservative’, Counter Reformation elements in Italian
painting, and this led to a type of art that could only be fully appreciated in countries
with somewhat similar regimes—notably Southern Germany and, later, Spain, where
Tiepolo was called in to satisfy illusions of grandeur that bore little relation to the
realities of eighteenth-century European politics. Essentially, the paintings produced for
all three types of patron reflected that Venetian desire to isolate herself from the contem­
porary world that was manifested in other fields through the censorship and the
restrictions placed on foreign ambassadors and visitors. But there was another Venice—
the famous, cosmopolitan city of pleasure with its throngs of tourists and dilettantes
who came from societies totally different in spirit; and to cater for their tastes a wholly
new kind of art came into being—one far more in touch with contemporary fashion
elsewhere in Europe, whether it veered to the rococo or the neo-classical, than were the
exalted visions of Tiepolo, Piazzetta and other history painters. •
Europe was at war, but Venice remained neutral. Foreign embassies intrigued,
foreign kings came to seek her alliance or to relax from the pressure of military cam­
paigns. In 1703 the British Ambassador’s first secretary, Christian Cole, came across a
Venetian girl, Rosalba Carriera, painting snuff-boxes and miniatures on ivory. He
persuaded her to turn to pastel portraits and within a few months her delicate, flimsy
work was being compared to Guido Reni.1 In 1707 the Ambassador himself, Lord.
Manchester, returned to Venice on a second official visit and commissioned Luca
Carlevarijs to record his entry.2 A year later he quarrelled with the Republic, and left’
taking back with him to England Rosalba’s brother-in-law, Giovanni Antonio Pellegrini,
and the young landscape painter Marco Ricci.3
1 Most early biographers report that a ‘certo signor Colle inglese’ was the first to advise Rosalba to
turn to pastels—see Memorie intorno alia vita di Rosalba Carriera celebre pittrice veneziana scritta dall'abate
N.N. net 1755 (Padova, 1843), P- 12, and Girolamo Zanetti: Elogio, 1781 (published 1818), p. 16. But
Zanetti is mistaken when he says that this occurred in 1708, ason 26 June 1703 Crespi had already com­
pared her work in this medium to Guido Reni—Malamani, 1899, p. 99. Crespi must have been thinking
of Guido’s very late, ‘chalky’ manner which was to be so attractive to eighteenth-century connoisseurs.
Cole played a very important pan in Anglo-Venetian artistic relations. It was almost certainly he
who advised the Duke of Manchester to choose Rosalba’s brother-in-law, Pellegrini, as the painter to
take back to England in 1707, and in 1710 and 1711 he wrote to Lord Dartmouth enclosing estimates of
pictures signed by Sebastiano Ricci and Niccolo Cassana—Osti, 1951, p. 119.
2 The picture is now in the Birmingham City Art Gallery—Nisser, 1937.
3 Mostra di Pellegrini, 1959, p. 15.

--- [Page 2] ---

FOREIGN INFLUENCES 277
And the German princes came in force: Maximilian of Bavaria found time amid
the disasters that befell him in 1704 to commission from Rosalba his portrait and those
of the most beautiful women in Venice. He was followed by Duke Christian Louis of
Mecklenburg and the Elector Palatinate with similar commissions and invitations to
Germany. In 1709 Frederick IV of Denmark took time off from his war with Sweden
for a holiday in Venice, where he was lavishly entertained and so impressed by Venetian
women that he too commissioned Rosalba to record their beauty in twelve pastels,1
while Luca Carlevarijs painted for him the regatta that had been offered in his honour.2
Above all there was the Prince Elector of Saxony, later to be Augustus III of Poland,
who visited Venice three times during the first two decades of the eighteenth century
and whose admiration for Rosalba’s art was limitless, as is testified by the huge collec­
tion of her work that he was to amass in Dresden.3
For these men and others like them Venice was not-an. impoverished Republic
trying desperately to maintain her former status in the world; her inhabitants were not
haughty nobles keen to assert their aristocratic claims in the face of upstarts who threat­
ened to swamp them. Rather, she was a haven of peace, still fantastically rich, where
their entertainment was encouraged by a government only too anxious to win as many
friends as possible; a city whose palaces were filled, as nowhere else in Europe, with
’ easily appreciated masterpieces of sensuous beauty and whose courtesans were renowned
for their charms. It is hardly surprising that they wished to have both city and women
recorded for them to take back to their warring kingdoms in the North.
With peace in Europe came the French; above all a new type of collector, sym­
bolised by Pierre Crozat, the fabulously rich banker whose house in Paris had already
replaced Versailles as a centre for young artists. In Rosalba’s pastels which he saw during
his visit of 1715 he found exactly what he was looking for; he wrote to her later and
promised her a painting by Watteau in exchange for her work, as this artist whom he
met on his return to France at the end of the year was the only man ‘able to produce
something worthy of you’, and he was not satisfied until in 1721 he persuaded her to
visit him in Paris.4 But for years before this visit, Rosalba had already been working
mainly for foreigners.
English, French and German visitors could agree with enthusiasm about the merits
of her work, and ambassadors from all these nations might employ Carlevarijs and later
Canaletto to record their entries into Venice,5 but for other and more important
1 Malamani, 1899, pp. 39 and 42.
2 The picture is now in the Fredericksborg, Copenhagen—Mauroner, 1945, p. 51.
3 Malamani, 1899, p. 49.
4 For the relations between Crozat and Rosalba see Malamani, 1899, p. 50, and Sensier, pp. 22 ff.
5 Besides Lord Manchester’s Entry into Venice (1707) and the Regatta in honour of Frederick IV
of Denmark (1709), Carlevarijs painted the Entry of the Count of Colloredo, the Imperial ambassador
(1726)—this picture is now in Dresden (Mauroner, 1945, p. 3 7, note 17). Canaletto painted the Entry
of the Comte de Gergy, the French ambassador (1725)—now in the Hermitage (Haskell, 1956, p. 298),
and that of the Count of Bolagno, the Imperial ambassador (1729)—now in the Hermitage (V. Moschini,
1954, p. 29).

--- [Page 3] ---

278 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
commissions there was a divergence of taste which was soon to become very pro­
nounced.
It has been seen that many German courts had been obtaining works of art from
Italy for at least a generation, and they went on purchasing pictures in the late Baroque
style to which they had grown accustomed.1 The more powerful of them were able
to attract the artists themselves as well as their pictures. The Hapsburgs summoned
Sebastiano Bombelli to Vienna, and in 1709 employed Antonio Bellucci as their court
painter. In 1716 the Dalmatian Federico Bencovich followed them there.2 Gaspare
Diziani went to Dresden in 1717 and worked for three years as scene painter for Augus­
tus the Strong.3 By this time Giacomo Amigoni was already in Munich painting for the
Elector Max Emmanuel and working alongside French craftsmen in the rococo
pavilions of the Nymphenburg gardens.4
The English too made it worthwhile for Venetian artists to leave their native
country, but as patrons they were very different from the autocratic princes of South
Germany or Austria. Lord Manchester, who brought back Marco Ricci and Pellegrini
from his embassy to Venice in 1709, was a cultivated diplomat with a wide experience
of the world, a passionate lover of opera, a man in close touch with an influential group
of dilettantes and poets.6 He belonged to that society of Whig noblemen who were
consolidating their victory of 1688 over the King and making sure that the new dynasty
should look to them for support. He and his friends, the Duke of Marlborough, Lord
Carlisle and others, were having their great country houses built for them by the
gentleman-architect Vanbrugh and were laying the foundations of a revived feudal
aristocracy that was to govern England for over a century. In some ways they resembled
the Venetian oligarchy ruled by a Doge with little more than nominal powers, and it is
not surprising that their sons should have looked back admiringly to sixteenth-century
Venice and its leading architect Palladio as the embodiments of their own ambitions
and tastes. Unlike the Venetians of their own day, however, these men were optimistic
and fully aware that their country was entering on an age of unparalleled prestige and
riches. They could afford to borrow from the Continent and yet be confident that the
future lay with them. ‘Music’, wrote the Duchess of Marlborough to Lord Manchester,6
‘is yet in its nonage, a froward child which gives hopes of what he may be hereafter in
England, when the masters of it shall find more encouragement. It is now learning
Italian, which is the best master, and studying a little of the French air to give it some­
what of gaiety and fashion.’ So too with painting.
When Pellegrini and Marco Ricci arrived in London they were at once set by Lord
Manchester to paint scenes for Scarlatti’s opera of Pyrrhus and Demetrius, and then to
1 See Chapter 7, and Lavagnino.
2 Pallucchini, 1933-4, PP- 1491-1511. '
3 Donzelli, p. 82.
4 The Amigonis in Nymphenburg date from 1716—Lavagnino, p. 121. See also Powell, pp. 68-70,
Iio and 147.
6 See Duke of Manchester, II, passim.
8 ibid., p. 140.

--- [Page 4] ---

FOREIGN INFLUENCES 279
decorate his mansions in Arlington Street and at Kimbolton in Huntingdonshire, rebuilt
for him by Vanbrugh.1 The same architect had for some years been erecting in York­
shire a country house as palatial as any German imitation of Versailles for Lord Carlisle,
a young man who had already embarked on a career to be more noted for its dazzling
social prestige than for any real political achievement. He, too, extensively employed
the two Venetian artists who from Castle Howard then moved to Narford Hall in
Norfolk, the country seat of the most interesting of all their English patrons, Sir Andrew
Fountaine, a rich collector and connoisseur who had travelled widely in Europe.2
In England Pellegrini, like some glistening butterfly, shed the last fragments of the
tough membrane of seventeenth-century stolidity that had hitherto inhibited his already
adventurous achievement. In a series of mythologies, histories, capricci and portraits, a
new style was created—weightless, sensual, sometimes clumsy and melodramatic, but
nearly always free of tensions. Rose-pink plumes shimmer against a blue sky streaked
with feathery white clouds; light sparkles on fragile armour; golden tresses spill down
flushed and invitingly naked flesh; fancifully dressed musicians in costumes of shot silk
lean over a balustrade and playfully allude to Veronese with none of the hard commit­
ment of Sebastiano Ricci or, later, of Tiepolo (at this date still only an apprentice). New
and subtle colour combinations of mauves and greens, transparent reds and silvers add
to the remarkable freshness of Pellegrini’s painting.
Some of the credit for these innovations must be given to the comparatively
uninhibited atmosphere of England. The easy elegance and charm of Van Dyck’s
portraits, so different from the pompous images of Venetian Senators, not only gave
him a number of technical hints, but also taught him something essential about the
nature of English society. He learnt his lesson quickly, as is shown by a lively and
informal drawing he made of Pierre Motteux, the enterprising translator of Rabelais
and Cervantes, a journalist and picture dealer who moved in the theatrical group which
circulated round Lord Manchester (Plate 46).3 The engagingly ‘private’ and witty
observation in a work of this kind anticipates the best conversation pieces that became
so dear to English society—a vein also exploited by Marco Ricci in a number of
half-caricatured musical groups that must certainly have fascinated Hogarth (Plate
47).
In 1712 Pellegrini and Marco Ricci quarrelled. Both left England, but within a
year Marco returned with his uncle Sebastiano and the two men were soon busily at
work.'Sebastiano belonged to an older generation than Pellegrini. His early patrons
had mostly been the powerful autocratic rulers of northern and central Italy, and from
his extensive travels he had absorbed a wide variety of styles which he was liable to
display with a sometimes excessive facility. Though he too could be a bold innovator,
his manner was much more tied to the past than was Pellegrini’s and also much more
taut, solid and robust. One of his earliest employers in England was Lord Portland, who
1 See above all for this whole section Watson, in Journal os R.I.B.A., 1954, pp. 171-7.
2 Vertue, HI, p. 94.
3 Mostra di Pellegrini, 1959, p. 56.

--- [Page 5] ---

28o PATRONS AND PAINTERS
had already commissioned paintings from Pellegrini.1 This young man was the son of
William Ill’s great favourite, the Dutch William Bentinck, whose loyalty to the Orange
cause had been rewarded with vast estates.2 Henry, who succeeded to the Portland title
in 1709 and was created first Duke in 1716, had lived a great deal abroad and had had his
portrait painted by Rigaud in 1699—a work that seems to endorse the opinion of a
contemporary that he was ‘a fine fellow, but very affected’. He commissioned paintings
from Ricci for his town house, and above all for the chapel of his country house at
Bulstrode Park in Buckinghamshire—The Ascension, The Last Supper, The Baptism of
Christ and The Visitation.3 Strangely enough this was a programme that would not have
been out of place in any Cathode church. When Vertue saw the paintings some twenty
years later, he understandably praised them for the ‘noble free invention; great force of
lights and shade with variety and freedom in the composition of the parts’.4
Within a few months of his arrival in England Ricci was working for Lord
Burlington, soon to become the most influential patron of the first half of the century.5
But it was not until May 1715 when the young peer had returned from his conventional
Grand Tour to Italy and set about rebuilding and redecorating his great mansion in
Piccadilly that he began to employ the Venetian artist on an extensive scale.8 As yet he
had no special interest in the austere Palladianism which was later to preoccupy him,
and he was as keen as any other nobleman of the age to decorate the interior of his
palace with large and colourful Italian paintings. ‘The wall with animated pictures lives’,
wrote Gay rather clumsily of Burlington House in 1715, and indeed a great number of
mythological-and history paintings by Sebastiano Ricci were let into the walls and
ceilings, some'of which were later transferred to Burlington’s villa at Chiswick.7
Ricci had many enthusiastic patrons among the Whig nobility and important
officials—before leaving in 1716 he painted a fresco of The Resurrection in that most
national of institutions, the Chelsea Hospital—and a few months after his departure
another of his compatriots, Antonio Bellucci, arrived in England and was equally well
received. Indeed, one of his first patrons was a man who had already given employment
to Sebastiano Ricci. John Sheffield, Duke of Buckingham since 1703, in which year he
had begun to have built his great London house, stood politically rather outside the
circles which biave so far been considered.8 Though he acknowledged the new con­
stitutional monarchy, he had been a staunch supporter of James II, one of whose illegiti­
mate daughters he had chosen as his third wife. He was described by Prince Eugene in
1 Verme, I, p. 38. 4 Turberville, H, p. 14.
3 A sketch for the Last Supper is in the National Gallery of Art in Washington and one for The
Baptism was sold at Sotheby’s on 7 December i960.
4 Vertue, IV, p. 48.
5 Ricci dated two pictures for Lord Burlington in 1713. These pictures—The Presentation in the
Temple and Susanna and the Elders—are at Chatsworth, the country house of the Dukes of Devonshire,
who inherited Burlington’s estate—Osti, 1951, pp. 119-23.
8 Wittkower, 1948.
7 Charlton. As Lord Burlington only began his villa in 1725, by which time Ricci had left England,
it is probable that the works by him there were transferred from the Earl’s town house.
8 See the Complete Peerage, and H. Clifford Smith, p. 26.

--- [Page 6] ---

Plate 49
FO
FLAH
TSRIF
EHT
NI
DNALGNE
DNA
YNAMR
EG
NI
STSITRA
NAITENEV
YRUTNEC
HTNEETHGIE
EHT
\
kraP
rooM
ta
oI
dna
retipuJ
:inogimA
.b
ecnirP
nworC
eht
fo
noitacudE
eht
fo
yrogellA
:inirgelleP
etanitalaP
eht
fo

--- [Page 7] ---

Plate 50
FO
ELDDIM
EHT
NI
DNALGNE
DNA
YN
AMREG
NI
ST
SITRA
NAITENEV
)15
dna
05
setalP
ees(
YRUTNEC
HTNEETHGIE
EHT
/

--- [Page 8] ---

Plate 51
8471
,notnimdaB
morf
weiV
:ottelanaC

--- [Page 9] ---

Plate 52 OWEN McSWINY AND HIS PATRONAGE
b. Canaletto, Cimaroli, and Pittoni:
Allegorical tomb to the memory of Archbishop Tillotson
a P. van Bleek: Detail from portrait of Owen McSwiney

--- [Page 10] ---

FOREIGN INFLUENCES 281
1712 as ‘a sanguine man, but of great parts and_esteemed a true patriot’. He became a
special favourite of Queen Arme, and when she died he retired from politics. He was by
then aged 67 and despite his political affiliations had acquired a great and influential
position in society. Within a year or two, as his mansion neared completion, he em­
ployed Bellucci to paint the walls of the staircase with scenes of Dido and Aeneas while
the ceiling was, in his own words, ‘filled with figures of gods and goddesses’, and on the
ceiling of another room Bellucci painted an allegorical tribute to himself and his
Duchess, which she paid for in the year of her husband’s death.
-Bellucci’s most important English patron was James Brydges, who managed to get
himself created first Duke of Chandos in 1719 at the age of 46.1 Though born in poverty
he acquired an immense fortune from war profiteering after having served for eight
years as Paymaster to the Forces. In 1713 he acquired the old Elizabethan manor of
Canons at Edgware and he spent the next few years turning it into a vast palace in which
he entertained his friends with magnificent concerts organised by Handel and Dr
Pepusch. He had a number of ceilings in the state rooms both at Canons and in his
London house painted with allegorical subjects by Bellucci and, above all, he employed
this artist together with the Bolognese stuccatore Bagutti and a mysterious figure called
Francesco Sleter to decorate the chapel. Bellucci painted three large and twenty smaller
canvases which were let into the rococo ceiling, representing The Nativity, The Descent
from the Cross and The Ascension, around which were grouped putti holding the
Instruments of the Passion.2
-Thus for a decade before about 1720 Venetian history painters received wide
support in England. The rich, the powerfully placed and the leaders of fashion were
keen to employ them on their new and ostentatious mansions. Unhampered by any
long traditions of hereditary patronage, these men seem to have inspired the artists who
worked for them with fruitful vitality. Most historians are agreed that the English work
of Pellegrini, Ricci and Bellucci constitutes their greatest achievements. But the situ­
ation was not to last.
‘ When Pellegrini left England in 1712 he went to Düsseldorf. When Bellucci
arrived in London a few years later he came from Düsseldorf. So too did two other
Venetian artists who arrived in England—Vincenzo Damini, a minor painter, and
Giacomo Leoni, an architect who helped to inaugurate the Palladian movement. In
fact, for a short time, Düsseldorf was with London and Paris one of the great centres of
tfie-more adventurous Venetian artists. The town was the capital of the Palatinate, and
was ruled over by the Elector Johann Wilhelm, who was the most interesting of all the
German art patrons during the first two decades of the eighteenth century.
Johann Wilhelm came to power in 1690, in a state which had been utterly devas­
tated by the troops of Louis XIV. Almost at once he was forced to quell a serious revolt,
1 Collins Baker and Muriel I. Baker.
2 After the demolition of Canons in 1747 the chapel was transferred to the country house of Lord
Foley in Worcestershire and it survives intact to this day as the parish church of Great Witley—Watson,
in Arte Veneta, 1954, pp. 295-301.

--- [Page 11] ---

282 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
but soon after, his fortunes turned. For some years between 1708 and 1714 he achieved
unparalleled influence in German politics, and with the growing success of his intrigues
and military prowess it seemed possible that the Palatinate might achieve the status of
one of the great powers. His love of glory-was reflected in the adulation of the artists
who surrounded him. ‘S’il auroit vécu aux terns des anciens Romains’, wrote one of his
courtiers, Giorgio Maria- Rapparini,1 ‘leur superstitieuse veneration n’auroit pas
manque de lui former son Apothéose’—but Rapparini himself, who could scarcely
mention his master’s name without comparing him to Alexander the Great, hardly
lagged behind the Romans in superstitious veneration, and much of the art created at
Dusseldorf during these years, such as the bronze equestrian statue by the Flemish
sculptor Gabriel Gruppello, was inspired by the Elector’s passion for self-display. But
he also had a genuine love of art for its own sake: ‘à l’égard de la Peinture, sa noble
manie est si forte, qu’après avoir dépouillé la plus grande partie de la Flandre amatrice
pour en composer la plus belle Galerie de l’Europe, j’ay oui après de sa Serenissime
bouche saisié d’un enthusiasme d’amour pour cet Art; que pour une rare Pièce de quelque
excellent Maître, il se depouilleroit à moitié’. This enthusiasm for collecting and patronage
was no doubt spurred by Johann Wilhelm’s marriage to Anna Maria Ludovica, the last
of the Medici, and it was guided by Rapparini, who was-a painter as well as a writer
and who had studied under Carlo Maratta in Rome. In his writings Rapparini shows
himself so anxious to give unqualified praise to everyone that his taste can only be
described as eclectic. But despite the general enthusiasm all round, one theme constantly
reasserts itself: ‘Une austère régularité de l’Art rebutte les Amateurs memes de l’Art.
Si le Peintre ne montre point au dehors quelque agrément de facilité, qui attire au
plaisir d’imiter en cachant le dificile, on en décourage le Sectateur qui s’en va ailleurs.
La Science vraiment de plaire à l’oeil materiel, consiste surtout dans le cromatique, c’est
à dire dans le coloris. Sans ce charme mignon la Peinture perd trop de sa force, et n’a
plus cette magie d’enchanter. Il faut égayer parci, parla son Tableau par une manière
riante, qui régné d’un bout à l’autre de la Pièce.’ It was in this spirit, so particularly con­
genial to Venetian artists, that Johann Wilhelm amassed vast quantities of works from
Italy2—especially by Luca Giordano—and commissioned painters such as Cignani,
Franceschini, Gian Gioseffo dal Sole and Francesco Trevisani to work for him in Bologna
and Rome. He also tried, albeit without success, to persuade Antonio Balestra and
Rosalba Camera (who acquired pictures for him in Venice) to come to Dusseldorf.3
1 I am most grateful to Dr Alessandro Bettagno for indicating to me the manuscripts of Rapparini
which were published in Dusseldorf in 1958. His Le Portrait du Vrai Mérité dans la personne serenissime de
Monseigneur l’Electeur Palatin gives a fairly hill account of Johann Wilhelm’s patronage, but as the eulogy
was written in 1709 there are naturally no references to Pellegrini. The extracts I have quoted can be
found on pages 14, 18, 75, 83, 81 and 69.
2 Nicolas de Pigage.
3 Cignani painted two pictures for him: a St John the Baptist and a Jupiter giving Suck in 1702 and 1715
—Pascoli, I, pp. 165-8. These pictures are now at Augsburg and Munich (Lavagnino, p. 85). Franceschini
painted for him a Venus and The Three Graces, and Dal Sole a St Teresa wounded by Christ and a Rape of
the Sabines—Zanotti, I, pp. 228 and 306-7.
For references to Francesco Trevisani and Balestra who, ‘geloso della sua liberta’, refused regular

--- [Page 12] ---

FOREIGN INFLUENCES 28z
He was just as enthusiastic—if not more so—about the Dutch. He visited Holland in
1696, and he avidly collected works by Jan Weenix, Adrian van der Werff and many
others. Both Weenix and Van det Werff were invited by him to Düsseldorf, and though
the latter refused to accept an official post as court painter, he agreed to work exclusively
for the Elector for six months in every year, and large numbers of his smooth, light,
enamelled paintings—in which ‘on ne voit rien de stante, rien d’oisif, rien de leche,
rien de sec, et de dur’—found their way into Johann Wilhelm’s gallery. But the real
importance of this gallery lay elsewhere. For it Johann Wilhelm had ‘presque vuide toute
la Flandre et la Hollande’. Seventeen paintings by Van Dyck and forty by Rubens,
whose ‘bizarrerie et bravure’ made a special impact and which are now among the most
splendid treasures of the Alte Pinakothek in Munich, prove that for once Rapparini’s
claims were not excessively exaggerated. Despite the debt that both artists owed to
Venetian painting, they were little known in that city and their effect on the receptive
Pellegrini was considerable.
Some sixteen years after the Elector’s death in 1716 the Baron de Pöllnitz passed
through the Palatinate and described the achievements of this ‘Prince magnifique en
toutes choses . . . Aencreux, liberal. Il protegeoit les Arts et les Sciences; sa Cour et sa
depense etoient Royales; sa bonte le rendoit aimable; il etoit les delices de ses Courtisans,
Tamour de ses Sujets.’1 The gallery consisted of five great rooms, three of them much
larger than the others. The first was entirely devoted to Rubens; the second contained
works by Van Dyck and other Flemish and Dutch artists. The third contained Italian
paintings, then there was one given over to Van der Werff and finally the fifth con­
tained pictures by the greatest Flemish, Dutch and Italian old masters—Raphael and
Veronese, Titian and Carracci, Correggio and Guido Reni, Rubens and Rembrandt.
In all the rooms were displayed bronzes and cabinets of miniatures, and below them
was another gallery containing casts of the main sculptures in Florence and Rome.
In this exhilarating atmosphere Pellegrini worked for three years.2 On a ceiling of
a staircase in the Elector’s castle at Bensburg he painted a magnificent fresco of the Fall
of Phaethon unparalleled among his works for verve, colour and strength of drawing.
But, above all, he was called upon to satisfy the Elector’s insatiable desire for glorifica­
tion. He painted a series of canvases depicting in allegorical form the benefits of Johann
Wilhelm’s rule (Plate 49a). There is a certain awkwardness about the composition of
some of these and a confusion of styles that may reflect the impact on Pellegrini of the
Elector’s widely varied picture gallery and especially of the Flemish artists in it. But
they are painted with a freshness, buoyancy and lighthearted delicacy of colour that
have no parallel in Venice itself at this date. Bellucci, too, celebrated his German patron
with allegories and group portraits which are much more clumsy than Pellegrini’s, but
employment under him—see the manuscript Eves of these two artists in the Bibhoteca Augusta, Perugia,
MSS. 1383.
For a long and fully documented account of the work of Foggini, Soldani and other Florentine
sculptors for Johann Wilhelm—see Lankheit, 1956, pp. 185-210.
1 Pöllnitz, III, p. 274. 2 Lavagnino, p. 120, and M. Goering, 1937, pp. 233-50.

--- [Page 13] ---

284 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
which show that he was among the earliest of the eighteenth-century Venetian artists
to appreciate the example of Veronese.1
Pellegrini’s connections with Düsseldorf made it logical enough that he should
move to the Low Countries when the Elector died in 1716? He worked in Antwerp
and Amsterdam, where he was actually commissioned to decorate the city hall with
frescoes—the first time an Italian artist had ever painted in Holland and a remarkable
sign of the cosmopolitanism of early eighteenth-century culture. From Holland he was
taken back to England for a short rime in the summer of 1719 to decorate the country
house of the English Ambassador in The Hague, Lord Cadogan, a man who -had
served as commander with Marlborough in Flanders and had later been a Whig M.P.
Paris was the third town which helped to liberate Venetian painting from the
bondage of the past. Sebastiano Ricci went there in 1716, on his departure from London.
He was at once brought into touch with Pierre Crozat, then aged 51, whose fine man­
sion in the Rue Richelieu contained a superb collection of paintings and, above all,
many thousands of drawings by all the greatest Italian and Flemish masters.3 Crozat used
to arrange weekly meetings of an exceptionally alert group of art-lovers, painters and
writers, and he was generous in giving hospitality to artists and making his collection
easily available to them. When Ricci arrived, Charles de la Fosse, who had himself been
to London, was lodged in Crozat’s house. He was in his eightieth and last year, and
though an enthusiastic admirer of Venetian painting, he was not impressed by Ricci.4
But, more importantly, Crozat’s latest discovery, the 32-year-old Antoine Watteau,
was living in his house, and the elderly Venetian admired his work sufficiently to copy
a sheet of his drawings.5 '
Four years after Ricci came his rival Pellegrini with his sister-in-law Rosalba
Carriera and their common friend Antonio Maria Zanetti, the engraver and connois­
seur. This visit, marked the peak of Venetian influence abroad and the last time that
contemporary Italian art was to make a serious impact on France. The aristocratic
society, with which the three artists were at once brought into contact through the
patronage of Crozat, was indulging in a relaxed atmosphere of careless rapture induced
by the death of their great oppressor Louis XIV and the apparently miraculous benefits
that could be obtained from financial speculation. Pellegrini was at once given the'task
of decorating the very symbol of the new regime, the Mississippi Gallery in the Banque
Royale, which was the headquarters of John Law’s reckless, but as yet successful,
Système. The programme given to the artist represented a curious combination of royal
glorification on the lines made familiar under Louis XIV at Versailles and allegorical
tributes to commerce which were to become general only in the second half of the
1 Another Venetian painter who worked extensively for the Elector at Diisseldorf was Domenico
Zanetti—de Pigage.
2 See the letter from Rosalba Carriera to Mariette published by Sensier, p. 95.
3 For Crozat see Mariette, II, pp. 43-53, Sensier, and H. Adhémar, p. 82, and Stuffman.
4 De La Fosse’s reported remark to Ricci, ‘Paint nothing but Paul Veroneses and no more Riccis’,
quoted by Levey, 1959, p. 22, from Walpole’s Anecdotes must presumably have been made on this
occasion. 5 Blunt and Croft-Murray, 1957, pp. 61-3.

--- [Page 14] ---

FOREIGN INFLUENCES 285
eighteenth century.1 He was to express ‘les différents avantages de la Banque, et de les
rapporter à la gloire du Roi et de Mgr le Régent’. This extraordinary task was achieved
by the use of a somewhat strained mythological iconography. The King was in the
centre, supported by Religion and the Régent; these figures were surrounded by others
representing ‘le Commerce suivi de la Richesse, de la Sûreté et du Crédit’, and all the
gods of Olympus were called in to portray Munificence, Magnanimity and the count­
less other virtues which characterised the scheme. Elsewhere the Seine and the Mississippi
were seen embracing, and views of ports and ships and the Bourse with men bargaining
made the same points in more concrete terms.
Exactly how well he coped with the commission it is impossible to tell as the
destruction of the frescoes followed soon after the collapse of the Système which they
had celebrated. Years later, when the whole climate of taste had changed, Mariette, who
strongly condemned, this destruction, saidThat the frescoes were of an ‘invention . . .
heureuse. Il y avait du fracas et des groupes agréables,’ but he criticised the drawing and
colour.2 None the less it seems likely that the frescoes had a considerable influence on
French painting of the first half of the eighteenth century.
Pellegrini painted other works in Paris, including at least one altarpiece,3 but the
real success of the trip was due to Rosalba. She was welcomed by Crozat, who lodged
' her in his house and organised a series of splendid receptions in her honour, and the
delicate and subtle flattery of her informal portraits was greeted with wild enthusiasm
by a society that was in full revolt against the artificiality and stiffness introduced by
Louis XIV and his court. Within two or three months of her arrival she had painted
the portraits of John Law, the Régent, and the little King himself who kept flatteringly
quiet during the sittings—as well, of course, as those of Crozat and his family. Round
these central figures flocked the aristocrats and the ambassadors, all fighting for their
portraits or little mythological pictures. The artists themselves were as keen. By October,
four months after her arrival, she heard the news that ‘I have been unanimously admitted
to the Académie. No vote was taken, as no-one wanted to make use of a black ball.’4
She met Rigaud and Watteau, both of whom expressed their deep admiration, and
all the other artists and connoisseurs—Coypel, Vleughels, Oppenord, de Troy, Mariette.
When she left Paris in March 1721 she had conquered the city and made a. number of
friends and admirers who were to remain loyal to her through every change of taste
until her death in 1757. More importantly she gave a stimulus to a type of elegant yet
intiniate portraiture that other artists were to bring to much greater heights than ever
she had achieved and that remains one of the triumphs of French eighteenth-century
painting. -
-iiThe cities of London, Diisseldorf and Paris were the most exciting centres of
1 See the document published by Sensier, pp. 97-102, Garas, 1962.
2 Quoted by Sensier from the Abecedario, pp. 102-3.
3 For the Couvent des Augustins Déchaussés—Sensier, p. 107.
4 Sensier, pp. 199 and 211.

--- [Page 15] ---

286 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
Venetian painting until early in the 1720s. Thereafter the situation began to change all
over Europe. In England there had been ominous signs for many years that national
feeling resented the success of these foreign artists. Alessandro Galilei, the Florentine
architect who had arrived in 1714, said that ‘the English do not behave like people in
Italy, where if a foreigner arrives with a barest hint of talent, everyone rushes after him
and native artists with far greater abilities are left behind. Here it is just the opposite
because they want to employ only their own countrymen though they are complete
donkeys... .'* Ilie remark was made by a disgruntled architect who had had no success
—but it contains an element of truth. -
The dome of St Paul’s, which had been a great magnet for the Venetian artists,
was given to Thornhill to paint. So too was the ceiling of the Queen’s Bed Chamber at
Hampton Court, after the Earl of Halifax had said that the Treasury would refuse to
pay if the commission was given, as had been intended, to Sebastiano Ricci. Moreover,
the new style of architecture, promoted by Lord Burlington after his return from
Vicenza in 1719, gave little scope for great ceiling decorations ‘filled with figures of
gods and goddesses’, and, as the Grand Tour became habitual and the English grew
more sure of their tastes, they discovered that they did not like large-scale history
painting—unless the artist was an Old Master who had died long ago. The career of
Amigoni, who arrived in England in 1730, some eight years after Bellucci’s departure,
is symptomatic of the change. He was first greeted with great enthusiasm by Lord
Tankerville, a prominent Whig and at that time Lord of the Bedchamber to the Prince
of Wales. Amigoni painted his staircase, but this was pulled down only eight years later.
He also painted a ceiling and the walls and staircase of Powis House in Great Ormond
Street with the Seasons and the story of Judith and Holofernes.2 It is impossible to be
quite certain who was his patron here. Lord Powis himself was an elderly man of
about 70.3 He had been one of James H’s most loyal followers, and as a consequence had
been arrested on more than one occasion, the last time being during the Jacobite alarm
of 1715. Two years earlier the great house which he had had built for himself had been
occupied by the French Ambassador. During his tenancy it had been burnt to the ground
and then rebuilt at the expense of the King-of France. In 1722 Lord Powis’s troubles
came to an end. His estates, which had been forfeited on his outlawry many years
before, were restored to him and he was summoned to take his seat in the House of
Lords, where he sat with the Tories. If he was the patron of Amigoni, it shows that the
artist was moving in very different and far less fashionable circles than those that had
welcomed his predecessors a generation earlier. Amigoni’s third and most important
English patron was a Mr Styles who had made a fortune out of the South Sea Bubble.
His country house at Moor Park was built for him in modified Baroque by Sir James
Thornhill and later Giacomo Leoni. Styles had intended to entrust Thornhill with the
decoration, but the two men quarrelled and to spite the artist Styles gave the job to
1 Quoted by Ilaria Toesca, 1952, p. 208.
3 For these events see Vertue, I, p. 45, and III, pp. 45, 49, 51, 67.
3 Dictionary os National Biography, and Wheatley, III, p. 18.

--- [Page 16] ---

FOREIGN INFLUENCES 287
Amigoni and Francesco Sleter instead. We can be grateful for the dispute, for
Amigoni’s four canvases illustrating the story'of Jupiter and Io are the most
beautiful that he painted in England (Plate 49b).1
Thus, Amigoni’s last big commission was due primarily to an accident. Thereafter
he found it difficult to get any employment as a history painter, and he was compelled
to turn more and more to portraiture. In this field his success was very great indeed and
when he left England some ten years after his arrival he is supposed to have taken ^4000
to ^5000 with him, some of it derived from his work for the court. He also left a
reputation which extended as far as Fielding’s Joseph Andrews.2 '
The English went on employing Venetian painters, but with rare exceptions they
confined themselves to views, landscapes and portraits—usually by Bartolommeo
Nazari.3 Only one man proved wholly original in his patronage of Venetian and other
artists’ and his very isolation shows how quickly English taste had hardened into a
conventional pattern. Owen McSwiny (Plate 52a) was an Irishman whose early life
was closely connected with the stage—as actor, dramatist and eventually impresario.4
In none of these careers was he a lasting success and it may have been this that encouraged
him to make his first venture into the world of art with a plan to have engraved a series
of Van Dyck portraits in English country house-s.5 This project too came to nothing,
but it fascinated McSwiny, who returned to a similar plan in later years. Meanwhile his
debts were pressing, and like many a man in such circumstances he left for the Continent
in about 1711. For the next few years he disappears from sight but when he re-emerged
it was with a scheme of great originality. Acting on behalf of Lord March, who became
Duke of Richmond in 1723, he proposed to have painted by the leading Italian artists
a series of allegorical tombs to commemorate the great men of England’s recent
history.®
McSwiny had judged his moment well. For a full generation England had been on
the crest of a great wave of optimism brought about by a series of military, political and
intellectual triumphs which had carried her to the very forefront of Europe. Everyone
recognised that her progress since the Glorious Revolution of 1688 had been immense,
but now the protagonists were old or already dead and the time had come to celebrate
their exploits. Meanwhile wealth at home and peace in Europe were encouraging
1 English Taste in the Eighteenth Century, 1955-6, p. 26, and Hussey, 1955, p. 43.
?,Verrue, III, p. 94; also Woodward, 1957, pp. 21-3, and Haskell, 1960, pp. 71-3. In Chapter 6
of Book III Joseph Andrews refers to ‘Amyconni, Paul Varnish, Hannibal Scratchi, or Hogarthi, which
I suppose were the names of the painters’.
3 Watson, in Burlington Magazine, 1949, pp. 75-9. _
4 McSwiny spelt his name in a great number of different ways at various stages in his career, for the
broad outlines of which see Dictionary of National Biography. See also Whitley, I, pp. 9, ir, 24-6, and a
number of librettos for operas adapted by him which are now in the British Museum.
6 Vertuc, III, p. 82.
6 There have been many articles about McSwiny’s commissions in recent years—see Voss, 1926,
pp. 32-7; Arslan, 1932, pp. 128-40, and 1933, pp. 244-8; Zucchini, 1933, pp. 23-30; Borenius, 1936,
pp. 245-6; Watson, 1953, pp. 362-5; Constable, 1954, p. 154! Arslan, 1955, pp. 189-92, and [Rivani]
1959; Mazza, 1976.

--- [Page 17] ---

288 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
thousands of English noblemen to visit the Continent and enjoy the pleasures of Italian
art. There was thus every reason to believe that a project which combined rever­
ence for England’s recent past with the prestige of modern Italian painting should do
well. " ’ “ -
‘ McSwiny wrote1 that the monuments were to glorify ‘the British Monarchs, the
valiant Commanders, and other illustrious Personages who flourish’d in England about
the end of the seventeenth and the Beginning of the eighteenth Centuries’. It is almost
certain that no definite list of these was drawn up from the start, for some of the
characters who were eventually represented only died when the scheme was already
under way. Most of those commemorated were, naturally, Whigs—but there was no
strict political programme, for it was found possible to include Robert Harley, Earl of
Oxford, who had played such a great part in bringing to an end the wars waged by
Marlborough (also, of course, represented) and who had been imprisoned for two years
in 1715. The pictures were all to be the same size, vertically inclined with semicircular
tops like altar paintings. In fact, the scheme represented one of the first attempts to
produce a secular and patriotic counterpart to the religious iconography of the Counter
Reformation and the more generalised ‘history painting’ of the Continent—among the
figures commemorated were many of the ‘Saints’ of the Enlightenment such as Locke
and Newton. Each picture was to contain an urn ‘wherein is supposed to be deposited
the Remains of the deceased Hero. The Ornaments are furnish’d partly from the
Supporters and Arms of the respective Families; and the Ceremonies supposed to be
perform’d at the several Sepulchres, as well as the Statues and Basso-Rilievo’s, allude
to the Virtues, to the Imployments, or to the Learning and Sciences of the Departed.’
McSwiny wrote that these subjects which were ‘of his own Invention’ were
‘elegantly executed by the Pencils of the most celebrated Painters in Italy’. With one or
two exceptions2 he chose these from Bologna and Venice, and he insisted that every
picture was to be painted by three artists—one for die figures, one for the landscape
and one for the buildings and other ornaments. Not surprisingly the painters concerned,
who were not told the purpose of the scheme, were thoroughly puzzled by this ‘amateur
with as-sound a knowledge of good pictures, books and antiquities as it is possible to
have’ who suddenly arrived to commission ‘a number of strange and fanciful ideas
which were neither histories nor fables’.3 In fact, McSwiny’s instructions to them must
have rivalled Shaftesbury’s in minuteness of detail.
In Bologna he relied mostly on Donato Cred and Francesco Monti as his figure
painters and in Venice on Piazzetta and Pittoni, while Canaletto and Cimaroli painted
some of the landscapes (Plate 52b). All four Venetian artists were beginning their
1 In the pamphlet To the Ladies and Gentlemen of Taste (no date), of which there is a copy in the
British Museum.
2 Solimena was apparently considered for Sir Isaac Newton’s tomb as is shown in a letter from
McSwiny to the Duke of Richmond dated 28 November 1727 kindly shown to me by Mr Francis
Watson. Francesco Imperiali of Rome painted the monument to King George I, a version of which
belongs to Lord Kemsley—English Taste in the Eighteenth Century, 1955-6, p. 54.
3 Zanotti, II, pp. 114, 221, 313.

--- [Page 18] ---

FOREIGN INFLUENCES 289
careers and Canaletto was as yet almost unknown. But Sebastiano and Marco Ricci
who collaborated on the monument to the Duke of Devonshire were already wellestablished painters and must have required a substantial fee to produce such menial
work for a commoner.1 The scheme began well, and by 1722 fifteen pictures had
already been started, most of which were later acquired by the Duke of Richmond.2
Yet it ran into difficulties which were almost inseparable from McSwiny’s conception
of the paintings. For attractive as many of the pieces are they entirely fail to achieve
their declared aim which was ‘to perpetuate (as long as the Nature of such Things can
permit) the Remembrance of a Set of British Worthies, who were bright and shining
Ornaments to their Country’. Rather, these ‘monumental pieces’ anticipate a taste,
which only became general later in the century, for capricci in which a vague feeling of
romantic melancholy is induced by the contrast between crumbling ruins of the past
and elegant, fancifully dressed spectators—a gentle, ‘picturesque’ adaptation of the old
1 The Venetian artists concerned in the enterprise were:
Canaletto Lord Somers (Birmingham)
Cimaroli
Piazzetta
Marco Ricci Duke of Devonshire (Barber Institute)
Sebastiano Ricci
Domenico Valeriani William III (Duke of Kent)
Giuseppe Valeriani
Cimaroli
Balestra
Domenico Valeriani Isaac Newton (Fitzwilliam Museum)
Giuseppe Valeriani
Pittoni
Canaletto Archbishop Tillotson (English private collection)
Cimaroli
Pittoni
Paltronieri Lord Dorset (Rome, private collection)
Cimaroli
Pittoni
Marco Ricci Sir Cloudesly Shovel (Washington) ■
Sebastiano Ricci
Canaletto? Lord Stanhope (Walter Chrysler collection)
Cimaroli?
Pittoni
Paltronieri was a Bolognese painter. I am grateful to Sir Anthony Blunt for pointing out to me that at
Sir Robert Bernard’s sale at Christie’s, 9 May 1789, lot 68 was described as Petoni—A pair of Triumphal
Mausoleums. _
2 Constable, 1954, p. 154. In fact there is a great deal of confusion about which of these pictures were
actually acquired by the Duke of Richmond. In 1741 McSwiny published nine of them in the Tombeaux
des Princes and said that they all belonged to the Duke. These were those to William III, Tillotson, Malborough, Godolphin, Dorset, Cowper, Sir Cloudesly Shovel, Newton and Boyle/Locke/Sydenham.
This list does not wholly coincide with the one given by Vertue, V, p. 149, who recorded ten after his
visit to Goodwood a few years later—William HI, George I, Devonshire, Wharton, Addison, Dorset,
Tillotson, Stanhope, Cadogan, Godolphin. The explanation is probably that the Duke of Richmond
owned some fourteen or fifteen but did not keep them all at Goodwood.

--- [Page 19] ---

290 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
theme of Memento Mori. It was almost as difficult for McSwiny’s contemporaries as it is
for us to understand the complex allusions to the virtues of his heroes. ‘I am persuaded
you will forgive me’, wrote one client in 1729,1 ‘if I tell you that it has been thought
your other pictures tho’ finely painted are defective in that respect [establishing the
identity of the hero]—and I have already seen two of them which turned to a quite
different design from what they were intended. I mean those for the late D. of Devon­
shire and Sir Cloudesly Shovel, the first of which is turned into a Brutus and the other
into a Roman Admiral by my Lord Bingley in whose possession they now are.’2 As
large decorative paintings hanging in the Duke of Richmond’s dining-room at Good­
wood, where conscientious visitors could find ‘a written description left to explain the
meaning’, they were admirable.3 As a homage to the great men of England which
might set a fashion among those who cared for the heritage of 1688 they were wholly
unsuitable. McSwiny himself realised their drawbacks, but he quite rightly understood
that the slavish following of too logical an iconographical programme would destroy
the charm that they had. ‘ ’Tis impossible to tell (in such a Narrow compass)’, he replied
to his critic, ‘more than one Man’s story, without running into w.t wou’d be very
Trivial, & y.e pieces wou’d resemble the cutts in The Gierusaleme Liberata. In the
Monum.t to y.e Memory of the Duke of Malbro’ I make a Soldier, attended with
Guards &c as visiting y.e Monument of a great General. I mean nothing more in it but
the visit—now if I was to represent his battles, Sieges and abilities as an able Counsellour
I have no way to do it but by Medaglions, Medals Basso-rilievo’s, Statues etc.’4
Despite these problems, the Duke of Richmond bought at least ten of the paintings,
and other versions of some of them also found purchasers. Then in 1730 McSwiny
scored ‘a fortunate hitt’ when Sir William Morice bought the remaining ones that had
been completed.5 And he had in any case decided from the first that further profits
could be obtained by issuing engravings of the series, and .for this purpose he employed
the Bolognese artist D. M. Fratta to make drawings of the pictures as they appeared in
Bologna and Venice.6 Some time in the 1730s he issued a pamphlet addressed ‘To the
Ladies and Gentlemen of Taste’ in which he invited subscriptions for a magnificent
volume—‘a more compleat Work of the Kind, than has ever yet been published in any
part of Europe’. It was to include ‘fifty copper Plates, viz. twenty four Sepulchral
Pieces, twenty four Inscription Plates (ornamented with Emblematical Figures), the
Frontispiece and the Title-Plate; all of the same size with the Sepulchral Pieces; viz two
Foot two Inches in Height, and one Foot five Inches in Breadth.
1 Letter from John Conduitt to McSwiny of 4 June 1729 kept among the Conduitt papers in the
Library of King’s College, Cambridge. I am most grateful to-Mr A. N. L. Munby for pointing out this
correspondence to me—Haskell, 1967.
2 The Duke of Devonshire thus altered must be another version of the one which once belonged to
the Duke of Richmond and is now in the Barber Institute. The one of Sir Cloudesly Shovel has not yet
been traced, but this too must have been a second version of the one belonging to the Duke of Richmond.
3 Vertue, V, p. 149.
4 Letter from McSwiny to John Conduitt of 27 September 1730—see note 1 above.
6 See letter from Joseph Smith to Samuel Hill of 26 November 1729 published by Chaloner.
6 Zanotti, U, p. 313.

--- [Page 20] ---

FOREIGN INFLUENCES 291
‘To which will be added (if the Encouragers of this Undertaking shall hereafter
think fit) not only the Characters of the above-mentioned deceased Worthies but like­
wise those of many of their Contemporaries, who made considerable Figures in the
Court, the Camp, the Church and State, as well as in the several Branches of useful and
polite Learning, and who contributed largely to the carrying of the Reputation and
Credit of the British Nation to a much higher Degree than it was ever before; with a
succinct Account of the most memorable Transactions in the Reigns of King William
and Queen Mary, Queen Anne, and King George.
‘The Whole to be adorn’d with Vignettes, Busto’s, Medaillons, Cuis des Lampes,
and other proper and elegant Embellishments designed and engraved by the most
celebrated Masters in Europe.’
The volume—Tombeaux des Princes grands capitaines et autres hommes illustres, qui ont
fleuri dans la Grande-Bretagne vers la fin du XVII et le commencement du XVIII siecle—
appeared in 1741, and was certainly very magnificent, but it must have disappointed
McSwiny who had returned to England some ten years earlier. There were eighteen
instead of fifty plates, and only nine of the allegorical tombs were engraved—all from
the Duke of Richmond’s collection. Only two of the heroes—Lord Dorset and Sir
Isaac Newton—were given Characters, while there was no account of the memorable
transactions of the reigns of William III, Anne and George I. It is none the less a fine
tribute to McSwiny’s enterprise and taste. Each painting is preceded by an inscription
plate with the name of the hero surrounded by a rich decorative frieze designed by
Boucher and engraved by C. N. Cochin, Laurence Cars and others. In many ways these
plates are more satisfying than those-of the actual tombs which were also engraved by
French artists. They contain allegorical allusions to the hero’s achievements and burst
on to the page with a tense, virile vitality that is rarely found in Boucher’s work.1
The criticisms of the paintings and McSwiny’s failure to attract enough subscribers
to complete the book shows once again how reluctant Englishmen now were to wel­
come contemporary Italian history painting—even when heavily disguised. But
McSwiny also catered for more conventional tastes. With his close friend, the English
business man Joseph Smith, he dealt in pastels by Rosalba Garriera2 and views by Cana­
letto. Indeed he was among this artist’s first foreign patrons, though he had strong doubts
about his merits. I hope you’l like ’em when they are done,’ he wrote to a client in 1727
of some pictures by Canaletto,3 ‘I am, it may be, a little too delicate in my choice, for of
Twenty pieces I see of him, I don’t like eighteen & I have seen several, sent to London
y.t I wou’d not give house room too, nor Two pistols each. He’s a covetous, greedy
fellow & because he’s in reputation people are glad to get anything at his own price.’
Though McSwiny’s enthusiasm was only qualified, he commissioned a number of
1 The inscription plate to Sir Isaac Newton’s monument, which is very much more restrained than
all the others, was designed by Joseph Perrot. Boucher, however, drew the medallion of Newton and the
signs of the Zodiac above the extracts from Fontenelle’s Eloge which are published on a separate page.
2 Malamani, 1899, p. 142, publishes a letter of 1753 to Rosalba Garriera with a reference to McSwiny
who had apparently not settled some account with her.
3 Letter tom McSwiny to John Conduits of 27 September 1730—see p. 290, note 1.

--- [Page 21] ---

2Ç2 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
pictures by Canaletto for English clients, and in doing so he was for once fully in touch
with national taste. On the Grand Tour noblemen regularly brought back their sets of
views by the master or his pupils. Canaletto took full advantage of such a steady clientèle
and raised his prices so much that he became virtually inaccessible to others and rightly
acquired the reputation of being spoilt by the English.1 Several generations of English­
men saw Venice entirely through his eyes, sometimes with surprising results. When Dr
Burney, the great musicologist, arrived there in 1770 he confessed that ‘we form such
romantic ideas of this city from its singular situation about which we hear and read so
much that it did not at all answer my expectation as I approached it, particularly after
seeing Canaletti’s view all of one colour: for I find it like other famous cities composed
of houses of different magnitude, orders of architecture, ages, and materials.2 Many
years later William Beckford, who rhapsodised about the mystery and decay of the city,
none the less found that it had been perfectly depicted by ‘the pencil of Canaletti’.3
When in 1740 war in Europe greatly reduced the number of English travellers to
the Continent, Canaletto found it necessary to come to this country, encouraged by
Amigoni, who had had plenty of opportunity for gauging English taste. He moved
throughout the land painting a series of London views and country houses for dukes and
enthusiastic amateurs who welcomed him despite the denigration of jealous rivals and
boisterous patriots (Plate 51).4 With short breaks he remained here for nearly ten years,
during which time his manner became increasingly mechanical, but his shorthand of
little blobs to represent the human figure was later adapted to brilliant comic purpose by
the satirist Thomas Rowlandson.
The career of the landscape painter Francesco Zuccarelli was even more successful.6
He arrived in England in 1752 and remained here for over fifteen years with one break
of three. His clients included George HI and he became a founder member of the Royal
Academy.
The triumphs of Canaletto and Zuccarelli are symbolic of the complete break that
had occurred in artistic taste between England and the Continent. But in Europe too the
situation had changed notably after the second decade of the eighteenth century. In 1724
Pellegrini’s ceiling for the Banque Royale was destroyed, and thereafter, with the
exception of Rosalba, contemporary Italian art proved of little interest to French
collectors. As had happened some sixty years earlier, the French had taken just enough
from the Italians to provide an impulse for their own native artists. But one man, who
though not himself French was so impregnated with French culture that he must be
considered here, continued to show great enthusiasm for Venetian art. Count Tessin
was a Swede, son of the architect who had built the Royal Palace in Stockholm.6 He
was born in 1695 and during bis early travels between 1714 and 1719 he first came into
contact with Watteau. A few years later he achieved great political importance in his
1 De Brosses, I, p. 282. 2 Burney, I, p. 109.
3 [William Beckford], I, p. 101. 4 Finberg, 1920-1.
8 Levey in Italian Studies, 1959, pp. 1-20.
6 For a brief account of Tessin’s career and collecting activities see exhibition of Le Dessin Français
dans les Collections du XVIIIe siècle, 193 5, p. 43 and Bjurstrôm, 1967.

--- [Page 22] ---

FOREIGN INFLUENCES 293
native country and in 1728 he became Surintendant des Bâtiments Royaux. During his
honeymoon in Paris in the same year he was engaged in buying pictures and furniture
for the King of Sweden and this brought him into touch with a number of French
artists. In 1739 he became ambassador to France and during his three years in Paris he
assembled a superb collection of contemporary drawings and paintings by all the
leading artists, especially Boucher, whose wife’s lover he apparently became and from
whom he had already commissioned a picture in 1737. The year before this he had been
to Venice in search of a painter to decorate the Royal Palace in Stockholm. He was
pleased with what he saw there—‘il est constant que l’école de Venise est sur turtrès bon
pied, et quelle se distingue en Italie’—but he found little that satisfied his immediate
requirements. In a well-known letter he enumerated the merits and drawbacks of the
leading artists and found that only Tiepolo was ideal.1 ‘Tout est dans ses Tableaux
richement vêtu jusqu’aux gueux etc. Mais n’est-ce pas la grande mode? Au reste, il est
plein d’esprit, accomodant comme un Taraval, un feu infini, un colorit éclatant, et d’une
vitesse surprenante. . . .' I^nfortunLtel^ Ite was also able to command far higher prices
than the Swedes could offer and the invitation to Stockholm met with no response. But
Tessin was able to indulge his own taste for the colourful and the pretty. He bought a
Danaë and a modello of the Beheading of St John the Baptist by Tiepolo for his personal
collection, as well as views by Canaletto, Cimaroli and Richter, portraits and fanciful
heads by Nazari and Nogari, drawings by Piazzetta and other works that attracted him.
Having failed to get royal patronage for Tiepolo, he wrote that he would do his best for
-the sculptor Gai, whom he particularly admired, though he seared that ‘jusqu’à cette
•heure je n’y vois encore que peu d’apparence, puis qu’il y a ici plusieurs sculpteurs
François engagés aux services de la cour qui ont enterpris tout ce qu’il y a de plus pressé
à faire’.2 Tessin had made many friends in Venice and he remained faithful to them long
after his art collecting was almost entirely confined to the French.
— iii —
Although French competition became increasingly serious as the century advanced
—‘hors de Paris point de salut’, was the opinion in Berlin3—Venetian artists went on
-finding enthusiastic patrons all over Germany. After the death of the Elector Johann
Wilhelm in 1716, Diisseldorf lost its importance, but the Hapsburgs and Schönborns
who had hitherto stuck to the more traditional late-Baroque artists were now ready to
welcome Pellegrini, Ricci and Rosalba Camera—partly indeed, because of their very
success in the more ‘progressive’ towns of London, Paris and Düsseldorf.4 And in-1725
.1 Siren, pp. 103 ff.
2 Letter from Tessin to A. M. Zanetti the Elder dated 12 March 1737 in Bibiioteca Marciana, Cl.XI,
Cod. CXVI, 7356.
3 Letter from Francesco Algarotti to his brother Bonomo dated 5 September 1749 in Bibiioteca
Comunale, Treviso, MSS. 1256.
4 Pellegrini went to Vienna in 1725-7 and Rosalba Camera in 1730. Ricci’s Bacchus and Ariadne in
Pommersfelden dates from after his visit to England—La Pittura del Seicento a Venezia, 1959. p- iZt A
letter from Johann Philip Franz to Friedrich Karl Schönborn dated 12 July 1723 to introduce Pellegrini
speaks of his success in London, Paris and Diisseldorf—Von Freeden, 1955, p. 848.

--- [Page 23] ---

294 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
Pellegrini went to Dresden where there was another sovereign whose fame as a patron
was attracting international attention. Frederick Augustus I, Elector of Saxony, and
since 1697 King of Poland as Augustus II ‘the Strong’, had made his court the most
brilliant in Europe, and his munificent architectural policy was transforming Dresden
into a city of dazzling beauty. But his interest in contemporary Venetian art was some­
what limited. He employed Gaspare Diziani for three years almost exclusively on
painting scenery for the theatre and the festivals which were his special delight. Pellegrini
was considered as a possible decorator for one of the rooms in the Zwinger, the fantastic
rococo pavilion which had recently been completed by Pöppelmann, but his project
was later destroyed and his activities in the city were otherwise confined to two paintings
in the Catholic church for which Sebastiano Ricci had three years earlier painted an
Ascension.1 A year after Pellegrini came Antonio Zucchi, the engraver, who was
employed in the famous print cabinet,2 and though Augustus considerably enlarged the
gallery of pictures he had inherited, his purchases did not very much affect Venetian
painters. Two large pictures by Pittoni, an artist particularly favoured by the Germans,
were acquired by him before 1722—Nero being shown the Corpse of Seneca and Agrippina
being killed on the orders of her son Nero. This gruesome subject evidently had a special
appeal for him, for he owned a second version of it by another Venetian artist, Pietro
Negri, a pupil of Zanchi. When, however, a third, painted by the Roman Marco
Benefial, arrived in Dresden, his son clearly felt that its possibilities had been exhausted
and he gave the picture away.3
Augustus the Strong also acquired six mythological and Biblical paintings by
Francesco Migliori, an attractive but not very significant Venetian artist of the first half
of the eighteenth century, and others by Molinari and Bellucci. Virtually all these con­
form closely enough to that ideal of ‘nudité’ which so appealed to German taste. The
patronage of his son Augustus III, who succeeded to the throne in 1733, was of a wholly
different order. Until the disaster of the Seven Years War nearly a quarter of a century
later the collecting activities of this man and his dictatorial minister Count Brühl were
among the most outstanding in Europe, and under the direction of a Venetian artist,
Pietro Guarienti, the Dresden Gallery achieved its great pre-eminence over nearly all the
others in Germany. His fabulous purchases for it—such as the hundred finest pictures
from the collections of the Dukes of Modena—cannot be discussed here but must at
least be mentioned as an indication of his vast artistic ambitions. Agents acquired works
of art for him throughout Europe, and in Venice itself the brothers Ventura and Lorenzo
Rossi, who acted in this capacity, were always on the look out for suitable pictures.
Apart from a large number of old masters they acquired six landscapes for him by
Marco Ricci in 1738. But the real impact of contemporary Venetian painting only made
itself felt when Francesco Algarotti returned to his native city in 1743 especially to
1 Pellegrini’s drawing is reproduced in Mostra di Pellegrini, 1959, Plate 92. For Pellegrini’s and Ricci’s
work for Dresden (and other information about the gallery) see Posse, 1929 and Garas, 1971.
2 Lavagnino, p. 115.
3 Bottari, V, pp. 27-8.

--- [Page 24] ---

FOREIGN INFLUENCES 295
purchase pictures for the King whom he was then serving. Algarotti’s commissions to
Tiepolo, Piazzetta, Amigoni, Pittoni and Zuccarelli are discussed in a later chapter1;
but he also bought many pictures by these and other contemporary artists from private
collections—two superb Piazzettas, one of them the famous Standard Bearer, two fine
mythologies by Sebastiano Ricci and portraits and fantasy heads by Nogari and Nazari,
artists who specialised in this type of picture which was ultimately derived from
Flanders.
No doubt all these appealed to Augustus, despite his initial reluctance to pay too
much attention to the works of contemporaries, but he had one special favourite whose
works he collected avidly on his own account—Rosalba Carriera. They had met during
his own visits to Venice early in the century when, as crown prince, he had revelled in
the company of the beautiful and vapid ladies whose features she recorded. But he was
far from satisfied with the number of pastels he had acquired from her on those occasions.
Throughout his reign he was always keen to get more—from the artist herself or from
private collections. His choice was catholic—portraits of friends and acquaintances or of
pretty women he had never known, allegories such as the Four Seasons, or the Four
Continents, or the Four Elements, religious subjects such as the Magdalene or the Virgin
Mary. It hardly mattered as they were all equally attractive. His appetite was inexhaust­
ible, and by the end of his life he had acquired over 150 examples of her work, while
Rosalba’s best pupil Felicita Sartori, who had married one of his councillors, came to
Dresden in 1741 and worked extensively for him.2
Another Venetian artist produced a great proportion ofhis output for Augustus III.
In 1747 Bernardo Bellotto, the nephew of Canaletto, arrived in Dresden and within a
year he was appointed ‘pittore di corte’—a post which he held until the break-up of that
court after the disasters of the Seven Years War.3 During that time he painted large
numbers of views showing, with an observation of everyday reality that had not been
seen since the bamboccianti, the busy brilliant capital at the height of its glory. They
were often produced in series of three sizes—the largest for the King, a smaller version
for Count Briihl and a third example for other clients. In 1765, after he had already
found employment elsewhere, Bellotto returned to Dresden. Augustus, his great
patron, had been dead two years and the artist stayed just long enough to paint the ruins
of the Church of the Cross which had been wrecked in a bombardment of Frederick
the Great that had shocked Europe.4 Then he left.
No sovereign in Germany could rival Augustus in his patronage or collecting, but
there were others who showed within the range of their far more limited means an
equal enthusiasm for contemporary Venetian painting. Thus^ Clemens August, Arch­
bishop-Elector of Cologne and younger brother of the Elector of Bavaria, who had
employed Amigoni, was also a frequent visitor to Venice.6 He too was naturally an
1 Chapter 14. See also L. Ferrari, 1900, pp. 150-4. 2 Malamani, 1899, p. 77.
3 See catalogue of Mostra di Bernardo Bellotto, 1955. Another Venetian artist working at Dresden who
left at this time was Pietro Rotari from Verona, who had arrived in 1750. 4 Posse, 1929, p. 300.
6 For a summary of Clemens August’s patronage of Venetian artists see Levey, in Burlington Magazine,
1957, PP- 256-61, and also the exhibition catalogue Kutfurst Clemens August, Koln 1961.

--- [Page 25] ---

296 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
admirer of Rosalba and owned pastels by her. Soon after 1730 he began commissioning
altar paintings for the many churches under his patronage by Pittoni, Piazzetta—whose
Assumption of the Virgin painted in 1735 contained the first signs of his lighter manner—
and by Tiepolo. But German patronage of Venetian art, and Venetian art itself, reached
a climax in 1750 when Tiepolo was commissioned to decorate the Residenz in Würz­
burg.1 The bishopric had belonged to the Schonborn family, whose vast patronage has
already been referred to, but after the death of Frederick Karl in 1746 and a short interval
under his successor it was taken over by Karl Philip von Greiffenklau. It was he who
with great difficulty and at enormous expense finally persuaded Tiepolo to come to
Wurzburg and decorate the Kaisersaal in the magnificent palace that had been built
by Balthasar Neumann for his predecessors. The beautiful rococo room with its rich
ornamentation of scagliola was quite unlike anything that Tiepolo had ever seen; the
subjects to be painted, drawn from German mediaeval history, were equally foreign.
But this unfamiliarity merely stimulated him to higher peaks of brilliance. On the
ceiling he painted Apollo conducting Frederick Barbarossa’s bride Beatrice of Burgundy in a
chariot drawn by four prancing white horses to the awaiting Emperor—a scheme which
he later adapted with suitable modifications to the Rezzonico family in Venice. On the
walls he was required to paint the Marriage of the couple being blessed by the Bishop of
Würzburg in 1156 and Bishop Harold von Hocheim being invested with the princedom by the
Emperor in 1163. The German princely clergy could not boast the Roman ancestry of
Tiepolo’s Venetian clients, and in any case mediaeval life was the only suitable precedent
for their feudal existence in the Age of Enlightenment. None of this worried-Tiepolo,
who ‘placed the scene firmly in sixteenth-century Venice, where in fact for him all
history took place’.2
As soon as the decoration of the Kaisersaal had been completed Tiepolo agreed to
paint the ceiling of the great staircase of the palace—by far the largest expanse he had
ever undertaken—with a fresco depicting The Four Continents paying homage to Karl
Philip von Greiffenklau (Plate 50). It would be charitable to describe this theme as
anachronistic in 1752, but Tiepolo delighted in the dreams of absolutism. Unlike
Pellegrini and the Riccis who had given of their best a couple of generations earlier in
an atmosphere of change and relatively free enquiry, Tiepolo was most at home in the
last bastions of an autocratic and backward looking society. In this fresco, so much
fuller of possibilities than anything that he had yet been required to do in Venice, he
painted his supreme and most imaginative vision of the ancien régime.
Other courts besides those of Germany looked to Venice for talent. The rise of
Turin has been referred to in an earlier chapter.3 By the second decade of the century
she had become powerful enough to attract artists from all over the peninsula. During
most of the 1720s and early 1730s the architect Filippo Juvarra was artistic director of
the city and on his authority a vast number of commissions was given to Sebastiano
1 Von Freeden, 1956.
2 Levey, 1959, p. 192.
3 See Chapter 7; and also Claretta, 1893, pp. 1-309 and Griseri, 1957, pp. 145-50.

--- [Page 26] ---

FOREIGN INFLUENCES 297
Ricci for paintings in the Royal Palace and for various churches.1 But the effects of this
patronage were no longer as stimulating to Ricci, now an old man, as his travels of
earlier days had been. He himself was prevented by a youthful misdemeanour from
visiting Turin, and the grandiose scenes in the style of Veronese which he sent to
the city have a somewhat hardened, academic quality which betrays a lack of inspira­
tion. _
Moreover, Juvarra himself showed only a very qualified attachment to Venetian
painting. When, towards the end of 1735, he devised a scheme for decorating the Royal
Palace in Madrid, he was asked by the King of Spain to commission pictures from all
the different schools in Italy.2 The fist he drew up included only one work by a Venetian
—Pittoni—as compared to four Romans and one each by a Genoese, a Neapolitan and
a Bolognese. The proportion is extraordinary to present-day taste, but in some circles
Roman painters were still looked upon as the most ‘serious’ artists working in the
Grand Manner; though it is also possible that the old Spanish hostility for Venice may
have played some part in determining the choice. If this is so, it no longer applied by
1739 when Amigoni went to Madrid as court painter.3 There he was followed by the
far more uncompromisingly Venetian Tiepolo, who, after ruthless pressure ‘da chi puo
comandare’, was sent out to Madrid in 1762 as part of an astute diplomatic move by
the Venetian government.4 However much the nobility might still want to be immor­
talised by the great artist at the height of his powers, the old tradition of political
cunning prevailed. On this his last mission Tiepolo, helped by his sons, once more
drew upon all his resources to glorify a formerly powerful, but now declining, mon­
archy. And then, at the very end of his fife, inspired perhaps by the traditional fervour
of Spain, he produced his most personal and most deeply felt religious painting in a
series of altarpieces for the royal chapel at Aranjuez. Soon afterwards they were removed
and replaced with works by the new international star Anton Rafael Mengs.
Tiepolo died in 1770, but while he was still active in Spain new conquests were
being prepared by Venetian artists in the most distant outposts of Europe. Pietro Rotari
had gone to St Petersburg from his native Verona as early as 1756, and until his death
there six years later he painted several hundred pictures of all kinds ranging from
portraits to mythologies. He was followed in 1762 by Francesco Fontebasso, a pupil of
Sebastiano Ricci, who decorated the Winter Palace,5 and in the same year Giacomo
Guaraña, another pupil of Ricci and Tiepolo, painted a Sacrifice of Iphigenia for Moscow.6
1 "Gabrielli, 1950, pp. 204-11, gives a full account of Ricci’s relations with the court of Turin.
In 1723 Juvarra commissioned a painting from Marco Ricci to indicate his proposals for the Castello
di Rivoli. As was to occur later in his commissions for Spain he showed his preference for Roman painting
by ordering four pictures from there (two each from Pannini and Locatelli) compared with only one
each from a Venetian and a Turinese artist—see Viale, 1950-1, p. 161.
2 Battisti, 1958, pp. 273-97.
3 It is true that Amigoni was born in Naples, but he spent his working life in Venice when he was
not abroad. Amigoni was followed to Madrid in 1753 by Corrado Giaquinto, whose influence on the
young Goya was far greater than that of any other Italian painter.
4 For the pressures put on Tiepolo to go to Spain see M. Brunetti, 1914.
5 Donzelli, pp. 209 and 90. 6 A. Longhi.

--- [Page 27] ---

298 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
The dramatic accession to the throne in June 1762 of the insatiable Catherine the
Great provided a new but, as it turned out, not very fruitful impulse for the importation
of Venetian pictures. Though her culture was mainly inclined towards France, Catherine
showed in her artistic as in her other tastes a reluctance to confine herself to any one
style and she did what she could to continue the policy of her predecessor. Thus
Bernardo Bellotto was planning to go to S t Petersburg after the collapse of the Dresden
court and the death of Augustus III. But while already on the journey he was persuaded
to stop in Warsaw by the new King of Poland Stanislas Poniatowski and, for twelve
years until his death in 1780, he produced for that art-loving and reforming monarch
a large number of views to record the rapidly changing aspects of his capital.1 Meanwhile
in 1772 Pietro Antonio Novelli painted for the Empress a picture of Creusa imploring
Aeneas to rescue his father Anchises from the fire of Troy. Though he had gone out of his
way to choose a ‘learned’ subject to compete with the painting by Pompeo Batoni
opposite which it was to hang, the thought of the climate made him refuse the oppor­
tunity to outdistance his Roman rival by accepting an invitation to Russia.2 In any
case Catherine’s admiration for Venetian art is testified not so much by the rather minor
artists and their works that she was able to attract to her distant court as by her purchase
of Tiepolo’s Banquet of Cleopatra. This masterpiece had been among those acquired
for Augustus III by Francesco Algarotti many years earlier3 and its transference to
St Petersburg in the 1760s provides a striking reflection of the changing balance of
power in Europe which had always played such an influential rôle in the diffusion of
Venetian art. But though it is true that Venice itself had perforce to remain a passive
onlooker while many of the city’s best artists and their pictures were drawn to London,
Paris and Diisseldorf, Madrid, Dresden and Würzburg, it will become apparent in the
next chapter that a more subtle relationship was possible between the dominant foreigner
and native genius than one which was essentially built up on foundations of military
strength and commercial wealth. For the Republic still retained many attractions and if
kings and landowners-could do little more than glimpse these on brief holidays, others
were free to settle within her frontiers and gain a much deeper awareness of the city’s
treasures.
1 Mostra di Bernardo Bellotto, 1955.
2 Novelli.
3 See later. Chapter 14.

--- [Page 28] ---

Chapter n
THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS
-1 -
CONSUL JOSEPH SMITH
THE most important link in Venice itself between the city and the outside world
was an Englishman, Joseph Smith, who became the greatest art patron of his day.
He was born in about 1675, educated at Westminster School and settled in Venice
during the early years of the eighteenth century as a businessman and merchant.1 He
traded extensively with Amsterdam and was concerned with the import of meat and
fish—an activity which sometimes involved him in disputes with the guild of the
Salumieri.2 He quickly became rich and influential and his house was occasionally used
for meetings between the Venetian nobility and English diplomats, which would have
been awkward if held more openly.3 Early in the 1730s he began to take an interest in
publishing which he put into practice by launching the firm of a young man, G. B.
Pasquali. Smith’s concern with this was far greater than merely financial, though money
in any field was always a source of the keenest interest to him. For the first few years of
the new venture he was actively engaged in the intellectual work involved. In 1735, for
instance, he tried to enlist the help of the Florentine scholar A. F. Gori in a reprint of
Guicciardini’s Histories, and he promised in return to find English subscribers for that
antiquarian’s own Museum Etruscum. The difficulties were great: unpublished material
had to be secured from the family; a frontispiece, drawn by the ‘famous painter’ Gian
Domenico Ferretti of Florence, had to be engraved; and a suitable figure had to be
found to whom to dedicate the book. Smith exerted himself in all these and many other
aspects of the production, and also continued to buy books, gems and pictures for
himself and for his clients.4 In 1744 he was made British Consul, a post inferior in status
1 For the fullest account of his career see Parker, 1948, pp. 10 ff., who also publishes his will and other
documents.
2 We can get some impression of Smith’s business activities after about 1740 from the papers of his
notaio,^Lodovico Gabrieli, among which references to Smith are very frequent—see in Archivio di Stato,
Sezione Notarile—Atti del Notaio Lodovico Gabrieli, Buste 7559-7570 (1740-70). Unfortunately I
have not been able to trace who was his notaio before that date. Also in the Archivio di Stato, among the
papers of the Avogaria di Comun—Civil 263/16—is an account of a dispute between Smith and the Arte
de’ Salumieri.
3 Public Record Office—State Papers 99/60: Letter from British Resident dated 18 May 1714: ‘The
Signor Tron, who goes Ambassador to London, sent on Wednesday last to left me know that he would
be glad to see me before his departure, and that he desired to meet me at the house of Mssrs. Williams
and Smith, British Merchants here.’
4 See letters from Joseph Smith to A. F. Gori in Biblioteca Marucelliana, Florence: MSS. B. Vin, 4.
These extend from 1727 to 1744, but the majority were written between 173 5 and 173 7. The Guicciardini
was eventually published by Pasquali in 1738.

--- [Page 29] ---

300 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
to the Residency for which he had hoped. In 1762, a year after resigning the consulship,
he sold the bulk of his library and most of his pictures to King George III. Then five
years later, at the age now of nearly 90, he temporarily resumed the post of consul when
his successor went bankrupt.1 He finally died in 1770 and was buried in the Protestant
cemetery at S. Niccolo al Lido. His taste in pictures reflects much that we should expect
from the two backgrounds, English and Venetian, hinted at in tins outline of his long,
acquisitive and persistent Use.
As a patron of the arts and the owner of a superb library he was well known and
appreciated in Venice, and he was in close contact with nearly all the leading painters.
He was also an assiduous theatre-goer and fond of the opera.2 And his palace on the
Grand Canal near the church of the Apostoli was the meeting-place for a number of the
more adventurously inclined nobles and intellectuals, for besides his great interest in
scholarly works and sine editions, Smith was always keen to publish books which in
hidebound Venice were bound to appear controversial, if not actually subversive.3
Chief among these visitors was the sarcastic, anti-conformist Padre Lodoli who would
come with his lively patrician pupil Andrea Memmo.4 Both of them were to play
important roles in the art world of Venice, and Memmo later acknowledged the influ­
ence that the meetings at Consul Smith’s house had had on his taste. But their great
friendship did not long survive their rivalry in love: both men were courting the
beautiful Giustiniana Wynne, the illegitimate daughter of an English gentleman and a
Greek adventuress.5 Memmo was some sifty-four years younger than the English
Consul and his victory was inevitable. Thereafter Giustiniana was to turn up again and
again as a link between many of the more intelligent patrons and writers of eighteenth­
century Venice.
Smith’s activities and influence may have diminished after 1744, in view of the
government’s discouragement of contacts between the nobility and foreign represen­
tatives, though we do hear from the Resident himself that the Consul was far better
placed from this point of view than his more senior colleague6; and Smith in his claim
to the appointment specifically boasted that he had ‘contracted Friendships with some
Principal men in the Government. . .’.7 In his earlier days at least he had had friendly
relations at various times with the connoisseurs Apostolo Zeno, Francesco Algarotti and
Antonio Maria Zanetti, and Goldoni in the dedication to Smith of one of his plays,
1 Public Record Office—State Papers 99/70—Letters of 10 and 31 January, 10 May and 10 June 1766.
See also Arcbivio di Stato, Venice—Esposizione Principi, Reg. 112.
2 See Goldoni’s dedication to him of 1/ Filososo Inglese in Opere, V, p. 259. He owned a large col­
lection of operatic caricatures by Marco Ricci, A. M. Zanetti and others—see Blunt and Croft-Murray,
pp. 137 if.
3 For many vivid comments on the publishing activities of Smith and Pasquali see the letters from
P. E. Gherardi to L. A. Muratori in the Biblioteca Estense, Modena. See also Chapter 13 of this book.
4 [Andrea Memmo], 1786, p. 1, which in turn refers to Lami: Memorabilia, Firenze 1742, p. 386.
5 B. Brunelli, 1923.
6 Public Record Office—State Papers 99/69, p. 2241.
7 Letter from Smith to the Duke of Newcastle dated 26 August 1740—British Museum: Add. MSS.
32,802, f. 182.

--- [Page 30] ---

THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS 301
II Filosofo Inglese, says that the Englishman had been among his keen admirers. From his
will, drawn up in 1761, we get the impression that by this stage in his long Efe Smith
had few close contacts in Venice beyond those of business. By far the most important
of these were with his client Pasquali, who published catalogues of his gems and some
of his paintings and books as well as many other works of .Eterature and philosophy
which the Consul clearly suggested to him.1 And it is also very likely that he had certain
definite business arrangements with some of the artists whom he employed for himself
and others.2
Two of his most interesting Italian friends Eved in Padua. Of these, one was the
Abate Facciolati, a professor of history in the University, to whom he left three books
‘as a testimonial of my Esteem and respect and of my grateful sense of the friendship
that for so many years [he has] honoured me with’. Facciolati had a remarkable collec­
tion of pictures which was designed to illustrate the history and progress of art beginning
with a series of Byzantine paintings. Such private museums were still most unusual
during the first half of the eighteenth century, though another one of Smith’s friends,
Padre LodoE, collected works of art on a similar principle.3 Smith’s other acquaintance
in Padua was the Marchese Giovanni Poleni, also a professor at the University, and an
engineer and architect of some distinction—in many ways a typical product of the
provincial Enlightenment.4 These relationships suggest that Smith was most at home
in scholarly surroundings.
This is aU we know about the Consul’s participation in the Venetian Efe of his day.
With the EngEsh his links were much stronger. We find him writing to Gori of his
friend the ‘celeberrimo S.r Dottor Mead’,5 the most stimulating art collector of early
eighteenth-century England and the great friend of Sir Isaac Newton, in whom Smith
himself was closely interested.6 His official duties brought him into touch with many
of the most important visitors to Venice, but besides these his house was always open
to English connoisseurs or artists in the city whom he treated with great courtesy. At
one time or another John Breval, Horace Walpole, Richard Wilson, Sir Joshua Rey­
nolds, James Wyatt and Robert Adam were aU welcomed by him.’ But no one really
liked him. Walpole characteristically jeered at him as ‘the Merchant of Venice’; Lady
1 See p. 299, note 4. Grosley, who was in Venice in 1758, writes—U, p. 99—‘LJImprimerie de Jean­
Baptiste Pasquali, l’une des meilleures et des plus occupées de Venise, roule, pour la plus grande partie,
sur les fonds de M. Joseph Smith; riche Anglois qui a vielli dans le Consulat d’Angleterre à Venise.’
. _ 2 The case os Canaletto is discussed separately, but it seems likely that Smith had some similar arrange­
ment with Visentini.
3 See Previtali.
4 There are two very friendly letters from Poleni to Smith, dated 9 and 17 April 1747, in the Biblio­
teca Marciana—MSS. Ital:Cl.X. Cod CCLXXXVIII—6580. In these Polòni asks Smith to obtain some
drawings for him from Visentini. There is an answer to the first of these letters, dated 14 April 1747, in
which Smith refers to ‘l’antica mia servitù et perpetua stima’. _
6 See p. 299, note 4. The undated letter is on page 211.
6 Smith and Pasquali published many books referring to Newton. In a note on page 30 of his Tempio
della Filosofia, 1757, the poet Arrighi-Landini tells how Smith supplied him with a copy of Pope’s famous
epitaph.
7 Levey, in Burlington Magazine, 1959, pp. 139 and 143.

--- [Page 31] ---

302 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
Mary Wortley Montagu found the self-congratulation with which he rendered her a
service overwhelming; and James Adam burst out in a fit of rage: ‘As to Smith’s
flummery ’tis all good for nothing with him—mere words, of course, that have no
meaning except when he has some favour to ask.’1 Even across the centuries we sense
something vaguely unattractive about the man—the obsequiousness of his dealings
with the King; the cynicism of his first marriage to the rich but mad operatic singer
Katherine Tofts; his grotesque though pathetic pursuit of Giustiniana Wynne; and
finally his second marriage, when aged 82, to the sister of John Murray, the Resident—
the very job that he had wanted for himself.
Despite the unease that he inspired in his fellow-countrymen and despite the fact
that he lived abroad virtually all his life, like so many Englishmen in a similar situation
he insisted on retaining the atmosphere of his native land. When Mme du Boccage
visited Venice in 1757 she noted that Smith’s palace was ‘entirely in the English taste;
the very tables and locks of the gates are made after the manner of that country’.2
And yet this palace was by that time full to capacity with Italian paintings, not all
of which would have suited the taste of an English gentleman at home. When he began
collecting in the 1720s, Smith turned first to Sebastiano Ricci, at that time considered
the finest painter in Venice. The veteran Lazzarini had virtually retired; his pupil
Tiepolo was still too young to be known outside a restricted circle. Yet Ricci, for all
the esteem in which he was held, was employed far more outside Venice, principally by
the court of Turin, than in the city itself, where his most important commissions were
largely confined to the Church, and henceforward to Smith.
The pictures that Smith bought or commissioned from the artist were painted in
his most scintillating manner, and many of them were freely adapted from Veronese.3
The most important were seven large pictures of themes from the New Testament
which he hung together in a special room in his palace and which he had engraved and
described in 1749, along with seven cartoons by the Bolognese Carlo Cignani, an artist
enormously admired in early eighteenth-century Venice, which were hung in another
room.4 These paintings from the New Testament may well be connected with a similar
series that Ricci was engaged on for the court of Turin at much the same moment.6
In fact, apart from their sine quality all Smith’s Riccis are of a kind which suggests
either that they were bought from the artist or his heirs after his death or that, if
1 Letter from James to Robert Adam dated 20 August 1760.1 am most grateful to Mr John Fleming
for showing me a copy of this letter. _
2 Mme du Boccage, I, p. 146.
3 For a full account of these pictures see Blunt, Burlington Magazine, 1946, pp. 262-8, and 1947,
p. 101.
4 The Abate Pietro Ercole Gherardi, who wrote the Descrizione of Smith’s Cignanis and Riccis, was
a Modenese friend of Muratori with whom he engaged in a long correspondence, now in the Biblioteca
Estense, Modena.
In the Galleria di Minerva, VI, 1708, p. 83, an anonymous writer said of Cignani, ‘nessuno ha saputo
fin’ora vendere in vita i suoi Quadri a si alto prezzo’.
6 This has been suggested by Blunt, 1957, p. 12, note 6, who discusses all the Sebastiano and Marco
Ricci drawings owned by Smith.

--- [Page 32] ---

THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS 303
commissioned, Smith had as yet formed no distinctive taste of his own. The remaining
thirteen religious and classical compositions are of subjects that were commonplace in
the artistic repertory of the day, and the fact that Smith also owned a series of studies of
heads copied from Veronese strongly suggests that he acquired a section of the artist’s
studio en bloc—for such' a commission would be most unusual. And it is likely that he
acquired the 211 miscellaneous drawings which date from various periods in Ricci’s Use
in the same way.
Many of these pictures have landscape backgrounds by Sebastiano’s nephew, Marco,
and he too was very fully represented in Smith’s collection. Once again it is not clear
what proportion of the 42 paintings and nearly 150 drawings were directly commis­
sioned by him, for the subjects offer no clue and one of the drawings is dated 1710,
when it is most unlikely that the two men knew each other. Some of them were
engraved by Antonio Maria Zanetti in a book which recorded a few of his own paintings
by Marco Ricci and which he dedicated to Francesco Algarotti in 1743.1 The subjects
include fantastic Roman ruins, genre scenes from country life and a number of land­
scapes (Plate 55b).
Among other artists whom Smith was especially patronising in the 1720s was
Rosalba Carriera. There are records that she knew him in 1721 and was working for
him by 1723 so that she must have been among the very first painters he employed—
indeed her name appears first on the list of his pictures which he drew up when he sold
them to George III.2 Throughout 1725, 1726 and 1728 she was receiving payments from
him, and we also know that Smith obtained commissions for her from other English­
men.3 In the end his large collection of pastel portraits formed the best known group of
her paintings in Venice: in particular it contained what was universally recognised to be
her masterpiece, Winter, represented (in Smith’s words) by a ‘Beautiful Female covering
herself with a Pelisse allowed to be the most excellent this Virtuosa ever painted.’4 Smith
commissioned two versions of this, and after keeping the one he liked best for himself,
he sent the other to a friend (or client).5 He obviously guarded it jealously, for writing
to Rosalba from London in 1735, a Mr Robert Dingley asked for a picture ‘of a pretty
young country girl... in the style of the Winter in Mr Smith’s collection.... There is
no need to say anything to Mr Smith about this. . . .’6
Such then are the outlines of Smith’s career as collector and patron until about 1730.
He was now aged 55, and living in the Palazzo Balbi near the Rialto where he had
1 Francisco Contiti Algarotto, Eruditissimo Viro, Bonarumque Artium Cultori, Hasce XXIV Tabulas Olim
a Marco Ricci Bellunensi Colorib. Expressas, Quae Extant in Aedibus Joseph Smith, et Antonio Mariae Zanetti,
D.A.F. Qui eas del. incid. et in lucem edit Venetiis Anno MDCCXLIII D.DP.
2 Cust, p. 153.
3 See her accounts for 21 May 1726, published by Malamani, 1899, p. 147: ‘Dato le Quattro Stagioni,
per spedire a Londra, al Sig. Smith.’
4 Cust, p. 153.
5 Letter from Smith to Rosalba Carriera (undated) in Biblioteca Laurenziana, Florence: Cod.
Ashburn, 1781, Vol. IV: ‘Giacché Ella intende di voler finire anche l’altro Inverno, quando ciò si potesse
terminare per Lunedi desiderei molto volentieri vederlo à confronto dell’altro per poter allora con più
fondamento risolvere quali di Due inviare all’atnico.’ 6 Malamani, 1899, p. 134.

--- [Page 33] ---

304 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
settled on arrival; in 1731 he bought the country house at Mogliano near Treviso
which he had leased four years earlier from the Procuratore di San Marco, Gerolamo
Canal.1 In these two properties he displayed his paintings and drawings by Sebastiano
and Marco Ricci, Carlo Cignani and Rosalba Carriera and probably also Piazzetta with
whom he was in touch during these years.2 It was already the most important collection
of modern art to be found in Venice (and there was also a growing number of old
masters), but reflected no particular originality of outlook. From now on, however,
there seems to be a change in direction, and Smith began to accumulate a series of
pictures which made his palace unique as an expression of individual taste. Essentially
the shift reflected—consciously or not—one that was taking place at the same time in
his native England: a move away from large-scale history pictures towards views and
landscapes, though in his case not towards portraits. It is indeed remarkable that though
he was anxious to have portraits of all the artists who worked for him, he never seems
to have commissioned one of himself.
The new direction of his patronage was marked above all by his employment of
Canaletto: the relations between the two men were central in the careers of both.
Though there is no conclusive record of their having been in touch before 1729, it
seems likely that Canaletto actually began working for Smith a year or two earlier,
by which date he was already a well-known artist with a European clientèle. Thereafter
Smith directed his whole output almost entirely into English channels, and conspicu­
ously into his own collection. The exact nature of their relations has been extensively
and authoritatively discussed, but remains uncertain.3 There is, however, no doubt
whatsoever that Smith’s control over the artist was such that from a very early period
commissions for his works were very frequently, if not exclusively, made through him.4
This was not altogether an easy matter, for both artist and business man had notoriously
mean characters: ‘nor is it the first time’, Smith wrote angrily after a brush in 1729,
‘[that] I have been glad to submitt to a painter’s impertinence to serve myself and
friends’.® He was, however, not the man to be put off by difficulties of this kind, and he
retained his self-appointed role as the agent through whom Canalettos were purchased.
It is probably this that the Swedish visitor Count Tessin meant when he said in 1736
that for a term of four years Canaletto was engaged by Smith to work exclusively for
him.6 Certainly besides the pictures that Smith obtained for others he was keeping a
very large number for himself—far more than the fifty-three at present in the Royal
Collection7—so that, if we include in the phrase ‘work exclusively for him’ those
1 Archivio di Stato, Venice—Dieci Savi alle Decime, No. 1309, £ 84V, and Sezione Notarile, Vettor
Todeschini, Atti 12,727, c. 13 5V and 12,731, c. 306V. ~
2 Smith sent works by Piazzetta to Samuel Hill in November 1729—see Chaloner.
3 Parker, pp. 9 ff.
4 For instance in June 1730 John Conduitt ‘desired Mr S[mith] to procure 3 pictures from Canaletto’
—see p. 290, note 1. .
5 Letter from Smith to Samuel Hill of 17 July 1730 published by Chaloner. 6 Siren, p. 107.
7 For instance a further fourteen appear in one sale catalogue alone—Christie’s, 16 May 1776: A
Catalogue of the Capital and Valuable Collection of Italian, French, Flemish and Dutch Pictures . . . of foseph
Smith, Esq., Some of the implications of this and other sale catalogues are discussed in Appendix 5.

--- [Page 34] ---

THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS 305
pictures that Smith was commissioning for other customers, there is no reason to doubt
the substantial truth of Tessin’s observation.
Smith’s first Canalettos were six views of S. Marco and its immediate surroundings,
larger than anything he had painted until then, bold, free and almost impressionistic.1
They are among his finest works, and in many ways the antithesis of what was to be his
characteristic style when later working for the Consul and other English patrons.
Already there is a change in the fourteen pictures which he painted for him between
1730 and 1735: the treatment is now less dramatic and much more sober. This change
corresponds to the evident purpose of the series. With two large exceptions—depicting
regattas—the group consists of twelve small views of Venice, chosen not because of the
interest, importance or beauty of the objects to be represented, but purely so as to
achieve a documentary record of the whole Grand Canal. Up and down, very system­
atically, the painter has worked his way through this great artery, leaving as fine and
yet as unpretentious a memorial as any city has ever had. Such an attitude to art was
quite new. Painters, even the most distinguished ones, had often been employed to
record important scenes from contemporary Use for their patrons or merely buildings
and landscapes which were particularly associated with them. Other artists had exploited
the ‘picturesque’ elements of back streets and slum Use and ruins. Yet others had painted
individual buildings of outstanding architectural interest. But these are all the very
elements that are missing in this series. With his eye firmly on the Canal the artist here
often records the palaces and churches in such steep perspective that we are not intended
to admire them in themselves. There is something curiously prosaic and business-like
in this approach of a painter who had until now shown himself so dramatic, indeed
romantic. It is almost as if the patron were drawing up a prospectus, a sort of visual
catalogue, of Canaletto’s abilities. Can this in fact have been the real motive for these
pictures? There is some evidence for the theory. In 1735 Visentini’s engravings of the
series were published, thus giving tourists an easy opportunity to get to know it.' A
year later Tessin reports that Canaletto has been engaged to paint exclusively for Smith
for four years. And, paradoxically enough, it seems that at this very time Canaletto had
virtually ceased working for Smith.
There are no paintings by Canaletto in the Consul’s collection between the series
engraved by Visentini and a number some ten years later. But it was at this very moment
that Canaletto obtained some of his most important commissions from English visitors.
If the Visentini series was indeed intended as an advertisement—if the pictures were
painted, in fact, with the engravings in mind—the scheme was remarkably successful.
For it was during the last half of the 1730s that Canaletto painted twenty views for the
Duke of Bedford, another series of twenty for Sir Robert Hervey, and seventeen for the
Earl of Carlisle. In all these groups the artist pays far more attention to the accurate
delineation of specific buildings than he had done when working for Smith. And it is
now that we first notice the mannerisms, the harshness, the signs of studio assistance—all
1 Constable, 1976.

--- [Page 35] ---

3oó PATRONS AND PAINTERS
the deterioration that was to become charactèristic of a painter ‘whom the English have
spoilt’. -
It is impossible to tell exactly what Smith was doing during this period. No doubt
he was buying old masters extensively. And he must also have been forming and adding
to his great collection of drawings—in 1734 Sebastiano Ricci died and it was probably
then that Smith acquired much of the contents of his studio. Many illustrated editions
of books were pubhshed by Pasquali during these years, and Smith retained the original
drawings most of which were by Visentini.1 ,
We know too that he was buying gems and cameos, and from the many letters
that he wrote about these to the Florentine antiquary A. F. Gori in 1737 and 1738 we
can derive our only explicit indication of his artistic tastes.2 He emerges as an enthusiastic
and apparently discriminating collector. ‘It makes no difference to me,’ he writes,3
‘whether the stone be cut or the figures in relief or of what size they be, as long as the work­
manship is excellent; and although I do like modern things when they are extremely
beautiful, I must be understood always to give preference to the antique, without
however blindly praising a bad piece just because it is antique. If I come across beautiful
things, I am glad to pay what they are worth.’ Many people, including, naturally, the
dealers of the time, went out of their way to praise Smith’s choice of stones,4 but not
everyone would have acknowledged his claims of generosity or even taste. Girolamo
Zanetti later said that his brother Antonio Maria who copied Smith’s gems for publica­
tion had been extremely badly paid, and he commented scathingly on the quality and
authenticity of many of the Consul’s ‘antiques’,5 despite the fact that Smith always
showed himself careful to distinguish between ‘the good or, rather, excellent works of
the sixteenth century when fine masters were alive’ and those produced in more recent
years.®
It was at about this time too that the connoisseur John Breval visited Smith’s
collection and was shown a little statuette which represented ‘seemingly an Aesculapio1 Blunt and Croft-Murray, pp. 67 if.
2 See p. 299, note 4.
3 On 30 March 1737: ‘Giacché Ella si dimostra si inclinata à favorirmi & satisfare il mio genio per tali
Cose, Io Le dico che tutto ugualmente mi piace, che la pietra sia incisa ò con figura ò figure di rilievo et di
ogni grandezza purché il lavoro ne sia eccelente, et benché dico ch’applico à cose moderne quando sono
belle assai, vorrei essere inteso, di sempre dar la preferenza all’antico senza però ciecamente stimare una
Cosa cattiva perche è antica. Capitando cose bello hò Cuore anche di pagarle quello vagliono. . . .’—
' Biblioteca Marucelliana, Florence-—see p. 299, note 4. •
4 The dealer Lorenzo Masini said that Smith’s medal cabinet was outstanding in its day for quality—
see Zabeo, p. 16.
8 Letter from Girolamo Zanetti dated 21 August 1751 in. Biblioteca Marucelliana, Florence—MSS.
B. VIII, 13, p. 170: ‘Vengo al Pasquali. La faccenda appartiene tutto al Console Brittanico Smith. Mio
fratello dissegnò le gemme e i Cammei, e gli Vantaggiò di molto colla matite perchè gli originali non sono
di quella perfezione, che si vorrebbe far vedere. Molti, se non ¡sbaglio, sono moderni . . .’ [in margin:
‘Fu assai male ricompensato.’]
6 Letter from Smith to Gori of 13 April 1737: ‘. . . Non rifiuto le cose buone ò per meglio dire le
ottime del secolo XVI quando viveano de bravi maestri, ne in niuna città fiorirono più che in Firenze,
.mà questa Testa d’Adriano è molto piu recente, e quasi quasi direi chi l’ha fatta ...’—Biblioteca Marucelliana, Florence—see p. 299, note 4.

--- [Page 36] ---

THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS 307
Priapus; with a Pudendum of monstrous proportion’ as well as some more conventional
sculptures, the Cignani cartoons and various books and antiquities.1
Early in the ’forties he resumed the patronage of contemporary artists on a large
scale, and also engaged in two interesting and important transactions. In 1741 he sold
a number of paintings, which are now impossible to identify, to the Elector of Saxony2
and in the same year, or thereabouts, he bought a collection of Dutch and Flemish
pictures from the widow of the artist Pellegrini.3 Indeed, it was almost certainly from
her that he acquired at least one of his masterpieces of Dutch painting—Vermeer’s
Lady at the Virginals (now in Buckingham Palace). It has been claimed that theWermeer
greatly influenced Canaletto’s development,4 but though the theory is a tempting one, it
is difficult to substantiate. If this picture, which was then in no way singled out for special
praise and, indeed, was attributed to the secondary painter Frans van Mieris, really
came from Pellegrini’s widow, it arrived at a time when Canaletto’s style was already
fully formed and his best days were nearly over. In any case the subtly modulated
lighting and precision of the Dutch interior bears little relation to the huge views which
Canaletto was then painting. For it was now, soon after the outbreak of the war of the
Austrian succession in 1740, which so cut down the numbers of English tourists, that he
once again began to work for his most persistent patron.
Canaletto’s return to Smith marked a very striking change both in his style and in
his subject-matter. He entirely gave up the small-scale views of Venice, on which his
international reputation was securely based, and turned instead to grandeur and fantasy
and a vastly increased range of subjects. There was quite possibly a second visit to
Rome, perhaps with Smith, and this led to the painting of six views of ancient Roman
monuments. These were the largest pictures that Canaletto ever painted for Smith,
and if for no other reason they must have made a great impact among those in his
collection. And their subjects made them unique in Venice. With their concentration
on the grandest of antique monuments they were like some signal to show that Rome
and Roman values were once more about to resume the leading role in Italian art. Yet
this is still Rome as seen by the outsider, and consequently lacks that matter-of-fact
element which was so characteristic of the Venetian views of his earlier years. Though
the paint is now harsh, there is in these pictures something of a return to the dramatic
vision of his very first pictures. It is significant that Smith should have wished for views
of antiquity only and ignored the contemporary Rome of Pannini; yet it is hard to see
these playing more than a symbolical role in the rise of the neo-classic.
This is worth stressing because the next few paintings commissioned from Canaletto
so clearly were intended to portray the style of architecture that Smith particularly liked.
It was in 1744 that Canaletto painted the ‘13 Door Pieces ... [of] the principal Buildings
1 Breval, 1738,1, p. 230.
2 Blunt and Croft-Murray, p. 11.
3 ibid., p. 14, and, for the list of Smith’s Dutch and Flemish pictures, pp. 19-23, and Vivian, 1962,
PP- 330-3:
4 Most forcibly and, to my mind, least convincingly by Brandi, pp. 60 if.

--- [Page 37] ---

zo8 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
of Palladio’.1 In fact, as Smith recognised in a note at the end of his catalogue, by no
means all the pictures in the series do represent that architect’s works, but this first
reference by him reveals clearly enough what was the aim of the group—to show the
‘most admired Buildings at Venice’. And the vast majority of these were by Palladian
architects of the sixteenth century. Yet the series as a whole is not altogether consistent.
Alongside the bland, almost mathematically precise, views of the Rialto as planned by
Palladio or the Courtyard of the Carita are quite imaginary scenes such as the Horses of
St Mark’s detached from the church and placed on the piazza or a fantastic interpretation
of the Scala dei Giganti. These are among the first ‘caprices’ in Canaletto’s’work and it
is tempting to link them with the arrival in Venice in 1743 of Francesco Algarotti, who
was later to show such enthusiasm for this type of picture and who was at this very time
in touch with Smith. It is equally possible that Canaletto derived the idea from Pannini
on his visit to Rome a year or two before, and it must certainly have been about
now that he painted for Smith his two capricci with Roman ruins in ‘a bold frank man­
ner’.2 Yet though such pictures are more readily associated with the fanciful Algarotti
than the more phlegmatic temperament of Smith, it was to his English patron that
Canaletto dedicated in these very years by far his most poetic excursions into the field
of the imaginary—the series of thirty-one etchings ‘altre prese da i Luoghi altre ideate’
(Plate 55a). These represent a side of Canaletto’s art which is totally absent in his
paintings for the Consul, though it is occasionally hinted at in his drawings—an appreci­
ation of distances, worn columns overhung with plants, the solitary black bird, arches,
mountains. It is a deeply felt, informal, often poignant vision, in which—almost for the
last time—Canaletto’s genius blazes at full power. Very soon afterwards he left for
England apparently on Smith’s recommendation and for nearly ten years there was
little contact between the two men.
After Canaletto’s departure in 1746 Smith turned to two other artists to continue
the series of overdoors illustrating Palladian architecture.3 Antonio Visentini had already
been employed by him for more than fifteen years as an architect and book illustrator
and Francesco Zuccarelli was an established landscape painter, who worked a great
deal for Smith, though it is not clear whether his ‘6 Landscapes representing the story
of Rebecca with Jacob and Esau’ and many other pictures had already been painted
before 1746 or whether the commission of that year brought about the first contact
_ between the two men. In any case Zuccarelli’s part in the enterprise was a minor one
despite its greater artistic quality. It consisted of adding attractive decorative landscapes
of the Venetian kind for which he was famous to the architectural views painted by
Visentini. The architecture was exclusively English and consisted of a series of country
houses and surroundings which neither he nor his patron had ever seen. All were in the
style which Lord Burlington and his followers had raised into a dogmatic canon of
1 Most of these overdoors are dated 1744, but the Horses of St Mark’s is dated in. Roman fashion A.u.c.
1332, which is equivalent to 1753. Sir Anthony Blunt has solved the problem by suggesting that Canaletto
accidentally added an extra x—see Exhibition of The King’s Pictures, 1946-7, No. 440.
2 Cust, p. 153. The settings are imaginary, but appear to have been inspired by Padua.
3 Blunt, 1958, pp. 283-4, and Vivian, 1963, pp. 157-62.

--- [Page 38] ---

THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS 309
taste—the Palladian. Five of the eleven pictures portray works by Inigo Jones, two by
Lord Burlington, two by Colen Campbell, one by Roger Morris, and one—curiously
enough—by Vanbrugh, though the example chosen shows him at his most Palladian.
In some cases separated buildings are combined, but none of these capricci includes the
playful distortions of Canaletto’s Horses of St Mark’s and it is clear that the genre was
not inherently sympathetic to Smith. The pictures were based primarily on engravings
taken from Colen Campbell’s Vitruvius Britannicus, and as far as architectural details are
concerned they are mostly of great, almost programmatic accuracy. The significance of
the whole series is made absolutely clear by the portrait that Nogari was commissioned
to paint for him of Inigo Jones, taken from ‘Vandyke, with the plan of the Banquetting
House in his hands’.1 Smith also brought out many editions of the works of Jones and
Palladio, and in 1767 he published one of the manuscripts in his collection by the
seventeenth-century theorist TeoFilo Gallacini. The title was indicative: Trattato sopragli
errori degli architetti, and within a very short time the book was brought up to date by
Antonio Visentini with a series of bitter attacks on the Baroque architects and their
successors down to Piranesi. The effect was not missed by the Venetians who frequented
Smith’s palace, and later Andrea Memmo was to write that ‘a great number of books on
architecture which I was able to see in his house, and the guidance of Signor Antonio
Visentini, made me pick out and prefer that style which is called pure and simple’.2
This devotion to the strict canons of neo-Palladianism in 1746 shows Smith
conforming closely to the English taste at the very time when it was wearing somewhat
thin in his own homeland. But it coincided with a move towards classicism that was felt
in all branches of Venetian art during the ’forties and that Smith’s patronage during this
decade did much to promote. Despite the commission of an important work from
Tiepolo, which came to nothing because it was expropriated by Algarotti for the court
of Dresden,3 Smith tended to move away from history painting and fantasy and turn
more than ever to landscapes and architectural paintings proclaiming the virtues of
sobriety. This tendency continued in the’fifties—in the first year of that decade Visentini
built a new classicising marble façade for his palace4—but by now his patronage of
contemporary artists was greatly diminished. Zuccarelli went to England in 1752 and
it may therefore have been at this period that Smith began employing Zais,5 whose
landscapes he did not think worth including in the batch of pictures that he later sold to
George III. In the same year, however, he acquired some of his most magnificent
drawings—including many by Castiglione and the Carracci—as well as some old
master paintings from the heirs of Zaccaria Sagredo.® He also bought some more
pictures from Canaletto, among them a number of English views, on that artist’s return
1 Cust, p. i6i.
2 [Andrea Memmo], 1786, p. 1.
3 Haskell, in Burlington Magazine, 1958, pp. 212-3. And see later. Chapter 14.
4 Gradenigo, p. 5.
6 G. A. Moschini, 1924, p. 82: ‘Che se Giuseppe Zais e Francesco Zuccarelli ebbero un gran protettore
nel Console Smith. . ..’
8 See document published by Blunt and Croft-Murray, p. 24.

--- [Page 39] ---

3io PATRONS AND PAINTERS
from London in 1755. These, together with the Riccis and Cignanis and most of his
larger works, were hung in his palace; at his country house he kept the paintings by
Dutch and Flemish artists, a number of Zuccarellis and many of the old masters.1
By this time he was already nearly 80 and was making plans to dispose of his
library and collections. In 1755 he published an inventory of his books, grandly but
slightly absurdly called the Bibliotheca Smithiana, almost certainly designed as an
elaborate sale catalogue, and a year later he began negotiations with the English royal
family. These were interrupted almost at once by the outbreak of the Seven Years
War.2 '
Disappointment, old age and the disruption of trade deeply affected him, and he
began to withdraw more and more from social Use. In 1756 he gave up his box in the
theatre of S. Giovanni Crisostomo3 and four years later he resigned the consulship and
wrote that he wished to return to England, ‘but first, having spent all my vacant time
in amusements of admiring the sine arts and possessing considerable collections of tilings
relating thereto . . .’ he proposed to visit the principal towns of Italy, as he knew only
Venice.4 At just this time James Adam met him and wrote5 that he was ‘devilish poor
& should he live a few years longer which he may do, he will die a Bankrupt... he
has a fine collection which he ought to sell if vanity wou’d allow him, but he is literally
eaten up with it’. However, in 1762, after difficult negotiations he at last managed to
sell most of his best pictures, books, drawings and gems to King George III.® Even so,
enough remained to cover his walls. His vitality was impressive: he still actively engaged
in business, including picture dealing, and in 1766 he again became Consul for a few
months. But, apart from this, he seems to have lived a retired fife, attracting little
attention from native Venetians or tourists. He finally died in 1770, two years after
Canaletto, with whom he will always be associated.
- ii -
MARSHAL SCHULENBURG
Another foreigner was commissioning and collecting pictures in Venice at much the
same time as Joseph Smith, and the contrasts in background and activities between
Marshal Schulenburg and the English Consul are reflected very closely in their aesthetic
tastes. There is no record that they were on close terms, and although they often
employed the same artists, their collections were very different.
1 Orlandi, pp. 79-80 and 206 (under Pellegrini and Zuccarelli). In 1757 Robert Adam visited Consul
Smith at Mogliano and saw there ‘as pretty a collection of pictures as I have ever seen, not large pictures
but small ones of great masters and very finely preserved .. .’. Fleming, 1959, p. 171.
2 Parker, p. 11.
3 Archivio di Stato, Venice: Atti del notaio Lodovico Gabrieli, 7564, p. i2v, 22 Marzo 1756.
4 Letter from Smith to William Pitt of 29 October 1760—Public Record Office, State Papers 99/68,
f. 96.
6 Letters from James to Robert and Jenny Adam of 20 and 27 August 1760 published by Fleming,
1962, p. 270. 8 See Appendix 5.

--- [Page 40] ---

THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS 3”
Johann Matthias Schulenburg, who came from a Saxon family, was born in 1661.1
After studying in France and Germany, he served as a professional soldier in most of
the great wars fought throughout Europe at the turn of the century. He fought for the
Hungarians and for the House of Savoy; he fought for the Saxons in a scries of engage­
ments against Charles XII of Sweden about which he liked to talk in later life; and he
fought in the wars of the Spanish Succession, serving under Prince Eugene at Malplaquet. It was this latter connection that brought about his association with Venice,
for when in 1715 the Republic appealed to Eugene for help against the Turks he advised
them to turn to Schulenburg. This advice was fully justified by the Marshal’s'brilliant
defence of Corfù against Turkish onslaughts in 1715 and 1716. The campaign, which
was commemorated by various works of art commissioned both by Schulenburg
himself and by the State, earned him the enthusiasm of Europe and the particular
gratitude of Venice, which erected a statue to him and awarded him a life pension of
5000 ducats a year.2 He continued to serve the Republic, though there was no further
opportunity for actual fighting, and after travel all over Italy as well as to London,
Berlin, Dresden and Holland, he settled in Venetian territory. He divided the last years
of his life between Venice and Verona, where he died and was given a splendid funeral
in I747?
Schulenburg remained a grandiose figure in his retirement. He was closely related
to the Hanoverian dynasty and was on friendly terms with half the crowned heads of
Europe, whose portraits—Bourbons and Hapsburgs, Farneses and Hohenzollerns—
lined the walls of the Palazzo Loredan in which he lived. They would call on him
during their visits to Venice and write to him for help and advice in problems of all
kinds. Thus Crown Prince Frederick of Prussia (later the Great) applied to him for a
young castrato of 14 or 15, but was disappointed that Schulenburg could only find ‘une
fille âgée de près de trente ans’.4 The old Marshal himself would have seen the arrange­
ment in a different light. He liked talking to his guests about women,5 and a young
English nobleman who fell ill during his tour of Italy was disconcerted to have his
doctor sent for by Schulenburg ‘and strictly required ... to tell whether or not I had
been claps.® To these younger men Schulenburg with his lavish hospitality and stories
of bygone wars was ‘un vieux bonhomme’ or ‘the oddest old fellow in the world’. But
though amiable enough, he remained excessively proud and could be very rude. The
will that he drew up in 1740 reveals a commanding spirit, keen to assert its authority
over distant descendants—he had no children of his own—and determined to maintain
1 The main source for Schulenburg’s life is Leben und Dentwurdigkeiten Johann Mathias Reichsgrafen
von der Schulenburg, Leipzig 1834.
..... 2 Romanin, VID, p. 53.
3 There is a drawing for the procession at his funeral in Verona—Archivio di Stato, VIII—Vari No.
35. He was in Venice 1729/30; 1732-4; 1737-41, and in Verona 1734-6; 1742-7.
4 Leben, II, p. 312.
5 De Brosses, I, p. 142: ‘C’est un bien honnête vieillard, qui entend la guerre à merveille et fort mal
la morale. Il nous fait sur le chapitre des filles de fréquents sermons, peu écoutés et point du tout suivis.. ..'
• Letter from Lord Rockingham in Verona to Lord Essex dated 2 February 1733—British Museum,
Add. MSS. 27,733, f. 13.

--- [Page 41] ---

312 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
in every way the noble status of his family.1 At one time or another nearly all the artists
whom Schulenburg employed were commissioned to record his own dropsical features.
Piazzetta drew him several times (Plate 53a), he was painted by Bartolommeo Nazari,
Giuseppe Nogari, Giacomo Ceruti, Gian Antonio Guardi, Francesco Simonini and
many others, sculpted by Corradini and Morlaiter, engraved by Pitteri. His principal
battles were painted by Simonini, whom he apparently took on his campaigns with
him, and in 1726 he employed Canaletto to paint a view (probably taken from a print)
of Corfu, the scene of his greatest triumph.2 All these artists he treated with royal
■generosity.3
Schulenburg’s collecting began suddenly in 1724 with a large purchase of old
master paintings and sculpture from a lawyer, Giovanni Battista Rota, who also acted
as an art dealer.4 Most of these came from the gallery of the last Duke of Mantua,
Ferdinando Carlo Gonzaga, many of whose belongings turned up on the Venetian art
market after his exile and death in Padua following the Austrian occupation of his state
in 1706. The sculptures included a bas-relief by Puget of the Assumption of the Virgin
which was highly valued, and among the pictures were many attributed to Raphael,
Correggio, Giorgione and particularly to Giulio Romano and Castiglione, both of
whom had been much employed by the Gonzaga in happier days. Unlike Smith,
Schulenburg showed a notable interest in contemporary Venetian sculpture, and among
the works he bought from other collectors and sometimes commissioned were a large
group of bronzes by Bertos (including an equestrian portrait of himself) and marbles by
-Corradini (including a modello of the statue of himself which the Republic had com­
missioned for the island of Corfu). His taste in old master paintings, as far as can be
seen from the list of his purchases, was conventional except for the very extraordinary
inclusion of a picture claimed to be by Giotto.
His relations with contemporary artists are of much greater interest. The first with
whom he came into touch seems to have been Gian Antonio Guardi who worked for
him for some fifteen years from before 1730 until 1745.® Guardi received a monthly
salary from Schulenburg and was clearly looked upon by him not so much as an
1 Biblioteca Marciana, Venice: It. VU, 480 (7785), cc. 234-264.
2 Haskell, 1956, p. 298.
Keysler, III, p. 296, writes of Schulenburg’s collection: ‘Some pieces by Castiglione deserve particular
notice, together with the last siege and new fortifications of Corfu, which are not only represented in
paintings but there is likewise a model of them cut in wood.’
Canaletto’s painting is described as follows in Schulenburg’s inventory—see p. 313, note 3: ‘Canalera
—I Tableau grand rep:te la Perspective de Corfu pend.t le Siege fait des Turcs dans l’Année 1716 avec la
Perspective de son Canal, une partie de l’Ile et de la Terre ferme Ottomane, outre les deux Armées
Navales, savoir la Vénitienne, et l’ottomane tirée en file.’ Many other models and pictures of Corfu are
recorded in the inventory.
For some of Schulenburg’s portraits see Morassi, 1952, pp. 85-91.
3 See, for instance, his dealings with Pitteri as recorded by G. A. Moschini, 1924, p. 93.
4 See the manuscript inventories of the Schulenburg collection between 1724 and 1737 in the
Staatsarchiv, Hanover. Edward Wright, I, p. 78, referred to the Puget and an ‘abundance of other fine
things’ from the Duke of Mantua’s collection as belonging to Rota.
8 Morassi, i960, pp. 147-64 and 199-212.

--- [Page 42] ---

Plate 53
ECINEV
YRUTNEC-HTNEETHGIE
NI
SNORTAP
NAMREG
tiertS
dnumsigiS
:inocimA
.b
grubneluhcS
lahsraM
:attezzaiP
.i

--- [Page 43] ---

Plate 54 VENETIAN ART FOR MARSHAL SCHULENBURG
AND CONSUL SMITH (see Plates 54 and 55)
Piazzetta: Idyll

--- [Page 44] ---

Plate 55
a. Canaletto: Dedicatory frontispiece to Etchings
b. Marco Ricci: Village Scene

--- [Page 45] ---

Plate 56
occoR
.S
fo
hcruhC
ta
noitibihxE
erutciP
:ihcseiraM

--- [Page 46] ---

THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS 313
original painter in his own right as a useful copyistand hack. During the whole period
ofhis employment only once—in 1737—was he commissioned to paint history pictures
of his own; and the miserable sum he was then paid (about ten zecchini for the lot)
shows that they must have been small and of little consequence. In general, he was
required to copy masterpieces of the Venetian Cinquecento—Veronese’s Marriage at
Cana in S. Giorgio Maggiore and Madonna and Child with Saints in S. Zaccaria, Tinto­
retto’s Temperance and Fortitude in the Madonna dell’Orto, Bassano’s Nativity in S.
Giorgio Maggiore—and even pictures by his own contemporaries, Sebastiano Ricci,
Piazzetta and Rosalba Camera. His remaining time was spent on churning out an
endless succession of portraits, sometimes as many as six a year, of Schulenburg himself
to be given to his friends and royal admirers, or of those grand connections to be hung
on his own walls. It is not surprising that the quality of those that have survived is
generally low1; only .rarely does the Guardi magic transform an obviously pedestrian
original into a work of authentic beauty, most conspicuously in the little Turkish scenes
copied in 1742 and 1743 from engravings taken from Van Mour—here at last the artist
was given the opportunity to display his talent for delicate and sparkling fantasy.2 There
is a strange irony in the situation. Schulenburg, who was Guardi’s most persistent patron,
wholly failed to appreciate the true nature ofhis gifts except on the one occasion when
he ordered him to paint these idyllic versions of the customs of his most ferocious
enemies.
In fact, the Marshal’s tastes veered in a very different direction. The nucleus ofhis
collection was made up oshistory and genre paintings by Pittoni and Piazzetta.3 During
the ’thirties, when Schulenburg was commissioning pictures from him, Pittoni was
considered to be one of the leading history painters in Venice. Almost alone among his
fellow-citizens he would be asked to contribute a canvas when large-scale international
commissions were being planned for some royal court, and he was already much in
favour with German patrons.4 For Pittoni turned the main episodes of Greek, Roman
and Biblical history into melodramas which represented for his contemporaries the most
acceptable and up-to-date versions of the old Baroque themes. Unlike Tiepolo who
largely confined himself to frescoes, Pittoni rarely painted other than easel pictures and
he was therefore much in demand among collectors. For Schulenburg he produced a
series of pictures illustrating scenes of high Greek and Roman valour and sacrifice—
Scipio and Alexander the Great, Polyxena and Iphigenia.
Piazzetta enjoyed a closer relationship with Schulenburg than any other artist except
Gian Antonio Guardi, and in his case the results of this patronage were wholly beneficial.
For the Marshal must have seen that Piazzetta’s gifts did notdie in scenes of dramatic
1 Apart from those reproduced by Morassi in the above articles see the portrait of Schulenburg
attributed to Gian Antonio Guardi in the Museo Correr, Venice—Pignatti, i960, p. 105.
2 A number of these have turned up in exhibitions and sales during the last few years—see Watson,
i960, pp. 3-13, who now attributes the series to Gian Antonio rather than Francesco Guardi.
3 See the published inventory (n.d.): Inventaire de la Galerie de feu Mgr. le Feldtnarechal Comte de
Schulenburg. This is referred to by Morassi, 1952, pp. 85-91.
4 See Chapter 10.

--- [Page 47] ---

314 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
action of the kind painted by Pittoni, and he therefore employed him on a totally
different type of picture which brought out the very best of this painter’s talents. It was
Piazzetta also who acted as Schulenburg’s chief agent in the purchase of interesting
pictures on the market—usually Flemish.1 For the old Marshal was particularly fond of
Dutch and Flemish painting—a taste that was reflected in the type of patronage he
afforded to Certain Venetian artists. He owned a drawing by Piazzetta of ‘des animaux
et figures à la flamande’ and some twenty heads of men and women by Bartolommeo
Nazari and Giuseppe Nogari in a genre that ultimately looked back to Rembrandt. It
was this taste for Flemish art that encouraged the Marshal to commission naturalistic
painting. Thus Piazzetta painted for him subjects such as a Beggar holding a Rosary, a
Girl with a Basket of Chickens and, above all, the great pastorals or idylls, now in Cologne
and Chicago. The significance of these pictures is not clear. Piazzetta himself who drew
up the inventory of Schulenburg’s collection naturally valued them very highly, but
described them merely as ‘représentant une femme assise au naturel, avec un garçon
entre les Jambes, un panier de raisins en main, des chiens, qui aperçoivent un canard dans
l’eau et deux hommes en distance’ and ‘Une femme avec un parasol, une servante, un
paysans, un garçon qui dort, et la tête d’un bœuf’ (Plate 54). It has been suggested
that the former picture contains a hint of social satire.2 While this is almost certainly
wrong, it does at least make the point that the pictures were probably taken to be far
more ‘realistic’ than our present appreciation of their poetic qualities allows. No
pictures of comparable size showing ordinary people were painted during the eighteenth
century in Venice except on occasion by Piazzetta himself. But perhaps the best reason
for believing that they appealed to a taste for naturalism in the Marshal is that his gallery
contained so many other genre pictures. In particular he owned seven by the provincial
realist Giacomo Ceruti, some of which portrayed beggars and others animals.3 These
pictures alone would suffice to make Schulenburg’s collection unique in Venice; and if
we imagine them hanging in his palace along with his Piazzettas and his various Dutch
and Flemish masters, we can see that the effect must have been strange enough to his
visitors brought up so largely on histories and mythologies.
Like Smith, Schulenburg patronised the vedutisti and landscape painters, but with
one or two important exceptions he owned nothing by Canaletto whose close relations
with the English made it difficult for other residents in Venice to acquire his work.
Instead he owned a view and a number of landscapes by Marieschi, and others by
Carlevarijs, Cimaroli, Joli and especially Marco Ricci and Zuccarelli.4
Schulenburg’s collection of pictures attracted less attention from travellers than did
Smith’s largely because he was constantly sending_crates of them back to his estates in
1 A number of pictures recommended to Schulenburg by Piazzetta, Pittoni and Angelo Trevisani
are recorded in the Archives in Hanover.
2 See White and Sewter, 1959, pp. 96-100.
3 See the published inventory, and for the subsequent sale of these pictures in England, Levey, in
Arte Veneta, 1958, p. 221.
4 There are ten pictures by Marieschi; six by Carlevarijs; four by Cimaroli; two by Joli; nine by
Zuccarelli and six by Marco Ricci.

--- [Page 48] ---

THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS 315
Germany. He began doing this in 1735, and thereafter he sent dozens of pictures on
two or three occasions every year. If we try and reconstruct the collections of the two
men and compare them, we notice several differences. Smith’s was based largely on
Sebastiano Ricci, Rosalba Carriera and Canaletto—all painters who were represented----
rather weakly in Schulenburg’s, though he owned a portrait and some paintings of Ricci
and was on good terms with Rosalba.1 Schulenburg’s collection was rich in works by
Piazzetta, Pittoni and Gian Antonio Guardi, none of whom -was particularly favoured
by Smith. Both men owned works by Marco Ricci and Zuccarelli, though Smith had
a far greater number. Neither had any painting by the finest artist of the age,-Tiepolo.
Smith showed a characteristically English penchant for landscape and views, Schulen­
burg for history, portrait and genre.
— iii — _
SIGISMUND STREIT
Curiously enough a third foreign collector long resident in Venice seems to hold a
position midway between those of the two great patrons who have just been discussed.
A businessman like Smith, a German like Schulenburg and, like him, in close touch
with Frederick the Great, Sigismund Streit owned far fewer pictures than cither—only
forty-eight in all—and made little impact on Venetian society. But some were of good
quality and they seem to reflect so sensitively their owner’s similarities and discrepancies
with Smith and Schulenburg that they are worth discussing here.2
Sigismund Streit was born in Berlin in 1687, the son of a blacksmith, and he came
to Venice in 1709. He soon began to engage in commercial activities which won him a
fortune. He retired in 1750 and four years later he settled in Padua, moving to Venice
only during the winters. He seems to have begun collecting pictures only about ten
years earlier when he was already well past middle age and in 1758 and again in 1763 he
bequeathed those he had acquired to various institutions, especially the Gymnasium
zum Grauen Kloster in Berlin where he had been educated. He died, a bachelor, in 1775
and was buried in the Protestant cemetery of S. Cristoforo.
One of the strongest emotions in Streit’s life was his admiration for Venice, the city
that had transformed his situation and turned him into the rich and complacent figure
who gazes at us from Amigoni’s portrait. He arranged for a yearly speech to be made in
Berlin, in honour of his adopted city, and of the pictures he owned a strikingly high
proportion were painted to celebrate its beauties and traditions. Works of art held a
far more specific and also a far more personal meaning for Streit than they did for more
sophisticated collectors. Of his four Canalettos, two showed scenes which were directly
concerned with his own life, as he pointed out in the long notes which he made about
1 On 28 July 1743 Schulenburg wrote to Rosalba Carriera recommending to ‘di lei amorosa assistenza’
a young woman painter called Angelica GriS—Biblioteca Laurenziana, MSS. Cod. Ashburn. 1781,
Vol. IV, p. 266.
2 For a brief outline of Streit’s career and a list of his pictures with details of their subsequent fate see
Rohrlach, 1951, pp. 198-200. For his position in Venice see Denina, p. 196.

--- [Page 49] ---

316 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
his pictures,1 One portrayed a sweep of the Grand Canal looking south-east from the
Campo S. Sofia to the Rialto. Well in the foreground is a gondola in which stands Streit
himself, while behind can be seen the Palazzo Foscari in which he lived. The other view
was of the Campo di Rialto in which his business activities were carried out.
He was equally keen to have pictures of the ceremonies and festivals of the Repub­
lic. Two more Canalettos, among his very rare night scenes, show the Vigilie di S. Pietro
and di S. Marta, the latter the most popular of all such occasions, and several other
paintings by Canaletto’s followers recorded the Doge taking part in official processions.2
This section of Streit’s collection culminated in an allegorical ‘Glory of Venice’ which
has unfortunately been destroyed. .
Streit shared Schulenburg’s taste for portraits of royalty, and he commissioned his
friend Antoine Pesne to paint Frederick the Great and the Queen .of Prussia. But, above
all, he liked to see representations of himself-and his family. Portraits of his father, his
mother and his sister hung from his walls as well as four of himself (Plate 53b)—not one
of which wholly satisfied him.
Schulenburg was an enthusiastic collector of Pittoni and Piazzetta, Smith of
Sebastiano Ricci—it seems almost inevitable that Streit should have turned to Amigoni,
who painted his portrait and ten other pictures for him between 1739 and 1746.3 Their
subjects were among the most popular of the Old Testament and mythological reper­
toire, but they had none of the glitter or heroic melodrama of Ricci or Pittoni. In them
everything tends to the pastoral or the mildly erotic. Suave and delicate, with no
emotional change of key between Lot and his Daughters and Solomon adoring the Idols or
between Bathsheba and the Sacrifice of Isaac, they were doubtless intended to be soothing
to the eye of the tired businessman. This class of patron has since become much more
familiar; in the early eighteenth century he was still rare.
Streit naturally owned a couple of Zuccarelli landscapes and the odd Dutch picture,
but the only other artist well represented in his collection was Giuseppe Nogari. This
painter was famous above all for his ‘teste di fantasia’—imaginary half-length portraits,
strongly influenced by Northern artists especially Rembrandt, usually of old men and
women. Streit had two of these—an Old man with a Pipe and Tobacco Pouch and an Old
Woman with Glasses, but he also employed Nogari to paint four allegories of Education
and other elevating subjects which were characteristically turned by the artist into
pretexts for rather mawkish genre—a branch of the art which he clearly found more
congenial4 and which, as will be seen in the following chapter, was winning much
support at the time in some of the more ‘progressive’ circles in Venetian society.
1 Streit’s notes on his Canalettos have been published by Zimmermann, pp. 197-224. The Canalettos
have also been discussed by W. G. Constable, 1956, pp. 81-93, who rejects the attribution to Moretti or
some other follower.
2 Zimmermann, pp. 199-203, attributes one of these—the Sala del Maxtor Consiglio—to Gianantonio
and Francesco Guardi.
3 These were the years when Amigoni was in Venice after his visit to England and before that to
Spain. His portrait of Streit, which is published by Zimmermann, was painted when the sitter was aged
52—i.e. in 1739.
4 I am grateful to Mr Hugh Honour for letting me see his photographs of these paintings.

--- [Page 50] ---

C hapter 12
THE ENLIGHTENMENT
VENICE had remained immobile—or so it seemed—but Europe had changed.
The last ten years of the seventeenth century in England and France had seen the
beginnings of an intellectual revolution that was to destroy the foundations On which
Baroque civilisation had rested.1 The absolute supremacy of any one authority, whether
secular or religious, was seriously questioned. Reason slowly took its place as the ulti­
mate criterion of judgement. Little by little and however grudgingly, tolerance and
diversity came to be accepted.-Trade began to replace landholding as an index of wealth.
These great changes at first gradually and then with ever-increasing speed profoundly
affected the nature of patronage and the arts. In both England and France royalty and
the Church no longer monopolised the leading painters. And the new patrons, whether
aristocratic or middle class, rejected the all-embracing cosmology of the Baroque.
As the eighteenth century progressed, various styles were encouraged and dropped: a
light-hearted rococo, which took over much of the formal language of the Baroque
without its moral seriousness; a renewed interest in realism, often tinged with satire or
didactic elements; an austere return to neo-classicism. The genesis of all these styles is
confused; none of them can be identified with any one social class; all of them frequently
overlapped. And combined with all these changes went a renewed investigation into the
part that painting should be expected to play in the life of a nation—an investigation
more searching than any that had token place since that inaugurated by the fifteenthand sixteenth-century humanists.
In Italy, too, new ideas were in the air. The creation in Rome of the Society of
Arcadia in 1690 marked a deliberate and symbolic break with seventeenth-century
culture—though significantly only in the field of literature. And links with the rest of
Europe were greatly strengthened by the vast numbers of foreigners who crossed the
Alps either as soldiers or as tourists at the beginning of the new century. Yet despite this,
and despite the blossoming of learned journals in touch with Paris, Italy at first saw
nothing comparable to the great changes that had shaken France and England, and
more and more those Italians—writers, artists and intellectuals—who wished to experi­
ence the new developments were compelled to travel to London or Paris. On their
return a great stocktaking of the state of Italian culture filled .the journals with contro­
versial articles. AU this prepared the ground for the diffusion of'enlightened’ ideas which
at first traveUed only slowly and hesitantly. As late as 1737 the Pope tried to prevent
the erection of a mausoleum to Galileo in the Florentine church of S. Croce and his
Dialogo could not be published until 1744? Although much had been achieved before
1 Hazard, 1935.
2 Maugain.

--- [Page 51] ---

318 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
then, the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748 is usually taken as the starting-point for a
new spirit in Italy. When in 1766 Voltaire turned his attention southwards across the
Alps and commented on the great intellectual revival that had taken place he suggested
that it had been going on for about twenty years.1 The changes had been very striking
indeed. All over Italy writers had become aware of the distance that separated them
from the rest of Europe and had begun to narrow it. In 1749 Muratori published his
Della puhblica felicita, oggetto de’buoni principi whose title alone proclaimed the advanced
ideas inherent in the thesis; in 1750 appeared the Abate Galiani’s treatise Della Moneta;
in 1754 Antonio Genovesi took up his chair in Naples as the first professor of political
economy in Europe; in 1764 Beccaria published his epoch-making Dei delitti e delle pene
and was rapturously welcomed in Paris. For the first time since the silencing of Galileo
Italy was in the vanguard of contemporary thought.
In these changes Venice had played little direct part. Though the ideas might filter
through the censorship without too much difficulty and be discussed perhaps in Consul
Smith’s library or by Caterina Dolfin Tron and her intellectual friends, Venetian interest
in maintaining the status quo was too powerful for the Republic to become the originator
of any of the doctrines of the ‘Enlightenment’—it was indeed a Venetian who proved
to be the most vigorous opponent of Beccaria—nearly all of which presupposed the
abolition of rule by aristocracy. Pietro Giannone, Carlo Antonio Pilati, Giuseppe
Baretti and other unorthodox thinkers were rapidly expelled from her territory.2 And
yet, especially in those circles which were most in touch with foreign influences, we
can trace the gradual spread of ideas which, among other things, were to have important
effects on art.
One of the problems that was most discussed in Italian literary and philosophical
circles in the early years of the eighteenth century was that of the relative proportions
that fantasy and reason should assume in the creative act. The discussion had been
stimulated by the formation of the Society of Arcadia with its deliberate call to reason
and by contact with French critics who had attacked the style not only of Marino and
his followers but of Tasso himself.3 Among those who made interesting contributions
to the debate that followed was a Venetian who sometimes extended the discussion into
the field of the visual arts and thus—mainly through his influence on other writers—
played some part in their development.
Antonio Conti, of noble origins, was among the pioneers of that growing number
of Italian intellectuals who realised that a visit to England and France was essential to
avoid the stifling provincialism of Venice.4 In 1713, at the age of 36, he went to Paris,
where he was in touch with Malebranche, Fontenelle and other leading figures. Two
years later he crossed the Channel and met SirTsaac Newton, who was to become the
most influential man in his Use. At first the relationship was highly satisfactory to both
1 In a letter of 1766 quoted by Natali, p. 5.
2 For Giannone’s residence and expulsion from Venice see Pierantoni; for Pilati see Brol.
3 See J. G. Robertson and Moncallero, I.
4 For Conti see Robertson, Chapter IV, and Vol. II of his Prose e Poesie, 1756.

--- [Page 52] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT 31$
of them: Newton proposed Conti’s election to the Royal Society—Ke was already an
amateur scientist—and Conti wrote 200 verses on Newton’s philosophy. Later there
was a furious break when on a second visit to Paris Conti revealed to the French some
confidential notes that Newton had shown him on the dating of classical history.1
Although he was denounced in a public letter, Conti never abandoned his allegiance to
Newton and the many other English writers he had met in London. He showed his
appreciation of English literature by translating Milton, Dryden and other poets, and
by being the first Italian to write on ‘Sasper’, whose Julius Caesar he imitated in a tragedy
of his own. His second visit to Paris lasted eight years between 1718 and 1726, and
among the many friendships he made was one with the Comte de Caylus.
In 1726 Conti returned to Venice, where he spent most of his time until his death in
1749. He had acquired a very extensive knowledge, unique in the Venice of his day, of
modern English and-French culture and he proceeded to display it in a series of essays,
philosophical treatises, scientific pamphlets and so on, which undoubtedly influenced
his friend Francesco Algarotti. From time to time he wrote about the arts, but as his
papers were only edited in 1756 after his death and in a very abbreviated form, it is
difficult to know just how close was his connection with contemporary painters—a
treatise he wrote on painting has been lost. He certainly had some vague ideas about the
effects that Newton’s optical discoveries ought to have on the use of colour, but these
made no impact.2 He went out of his way to praise Canaletto for his sagacity in using
the camera ottica to paint views of the Grand Canal.3 And he made an interesting
defence of fantasy in painting which chimed in well with contemporary practice and
thus suggests that he was one of the few intellectuals of the day who did not disapprove
of the licence; taken by Venetian artists—though as it is not known just when he wrote
his brief paragraph on painting it is impossible to estimate its polemical intentions. ‘The
painter’s fantasy’, he wrote,4 ‘should be expressed in breadth of knowledge, in subtlety
and correctness of draughtsmanship, in liveliness and vigour of execution. Moreover,
1 Apart from the above see Manuel, pp. 86 and 94.
2 Conti, II, p. cxlviii: ‘Leonardo da Vinci cita un suo manoscritto, dove egli parla dell’armonia de’
colori in ordine alla pittura. Il manoscritto è nella Biblioteca di Milano, e si renderebbe un gran servigio
alle bell’ani di stamparlo, in un tempo che la teoria Newtoniana de’ colori ha data occasione a molti il
determinare per la regola meccanica de* centri di gravità la loro composizione. Da questa ricavò il suo
secreto quel Pittor Tedesco che stampa le pitture, della qual arte ne diede varj saggj a Londra, ed uno ne
, conserva qui in Venezia il Signor Antonio Zanetti. Io vidi questo Pittore all’Haja, ed egli mi assicurò,
che seguendo i principi ^^ Newtono su l’immutabilità e varia ri frangibilità e reflessibilità de’ raggi della
luce, egli avea stabiliti i gradi di vivacità e d’indebolimento da darsi a’ colori per armonizarli. Se ciò è
vero, si vede come in ombra, non esser impossibile il determinare nel corpo umano l’armonia de’ colori,
qual forse l’avea fissata Apelle, che dipingea le cose che non si possono dipingere, come i tuoni, i baleni,
i folgori. . . .'
3 ibid., p. 250: ‘S’adopri pure la camera ottica per far la perspettiva d’un canale di Venezia con le sue
fabbriche: il Canaletto per la sua sagacità potrà trasferire nella sua pittura più punti di un altro; ma non
è possibile che mai tutti fi trasferisca. Contuttociò i trasferiti da lui faranno un’impressione così viva nell’
occhio, che vedendo il suo quadro a prima vista io sarò persuaso di vedere l’oggetto stesso. . . .’
4 ibid., p. 278: ‘La fantasia pittoresca deve essere secondo lui spaziosa nelle cognizioni, delicata e retta
nel dissegno, vivace e ardente nell’esecuzione, appassionata e espressiva del senso e dell’affetto, e graziosa
per discostarsi un poco dalla natura ed accomodarsi meglio al giudizio e al piacere del senso. . . .’

--- [Page 53] ---

320 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
it should excite the senses and the passions, and grace requires it to move away some­
what from nature so as to be the better adapted to the judgement and pleasure of the
senses.’ This seems to be the very justification of a modello by Tiepolo or Pittoni.
Such detached references are too brief for us to claim that Conti had any coherent
aesthetic ideas or that they played much part in encouraging any particular painters.
But we know that he showed an interest in the arts, for it was to him that the elder
Zanetti wrote to announce his rediscovery of the process for making colour woodcuts1;
and we know too that Francesco Algarotti, who was in constant correspondence with
him, took over many ideas from this Italian pioneer in the understanding of Newton.
As we will see, even in his most neo-classical phase Algarotti never lost his belief in the
vital importance of creative fantasy, and it is certain that this belief was largely inherited
from Conti. Indeed, a thin trickle of support for the artist’s right to make use of his
unfettered-imagination runs right through Italian eighteenth-century thought until
with Saverio Bettinelli’s Delientusiasmo per le Belle Arti (Milan, 1769) it merges into
outright acceptance of the ‘genius’ with all his vagaries.
But there was in Venice during the first half of the eighteenth century a thinker
whose artistic ideas were to prove far more immediately stimulating than those of Conti,
even if no more effective in practice. Among the men who frequented Consul Smith’s
palace on the Grand Canal was Padre Carlo Lodoli, a brother of the Minori Osservanti.2
Lodoli had studied mathematics and French, travelled in Rome and other parts of Italy
and returned at the age of 30 to his native Venice in 1720. Here he opened a private
school for the sons of some of the leading families as well as those of his friends. This
school was run on the most advanced, modern lines. Lodoli’s favourite authors were
Galileo and Bacon; he took his pupils to visit libraries and distinguished scholars. He
brought them up on Cicero and Puffendorf on the duties of man. And he had a brush
with the Inquisitori di Stato because he insisted on using State documents as suitable
subject-matter for grammatical and literary investigation. He was a keen admirer of
Vico and he was among those who persuaded the Neapolitan philosopher to write his
Autobiography, which was first published in Venice.3 After some years he was appointed
chief censor of the Republic with duties which he carried out conscientiously but in a
liberal spirit. He soon became associated with a number of the more enlightened figures
in the city—Andrea Memmo, especially, but also Angelo Querini and Giambattista
Pasquali, the publisher, who in later years could never mention his name without tears
in his eyes. Nearly all these were also friends of Consul Smith and for a time he had a
number of admirers among the Venetian aristocracy. Outside Venice he was in touch
with Montesquieu and Scipione Maffei.
In appearance Lodoli was uncouth and his manner was gruff. He indulged in a
degree of outspokenness which would hardly have been tolerated in anyone else; but
1 Lorenzetti, 1917, p. 49, note 1.
2 Our only source for Lodoli’s life is Andrea Memmo’s anonymous Elementi dell’architettura lodoliana,
first published in Rome in 1786, but there are many scattered references to him in Venetian learned
journalism of the first half of the eighteenth century. See also Petrocchi, 1947.
8 In [P. Angelo Calogerà]: Raccolta, I, 1728. See also Fisch and Bergin, pp. 183-4.

--- [Page 54] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT 321
this is almost certainly because he was not taken wholly seriously even by those who
most admired him. He enjoyed some of the privileges of the licensed jester. Besides, he
knew how to turn back when the situation was becoming awkward. We learn that he
‘never objected to the luxury of great noblemen, for without their generosity, ambition
or whim countless good craftsmen would die of starvation’—the sort of perverse logic
that has often been used by radicals tolerated in a conservative society.
Though Lodoli must sometimes have found it difficult to express openly his moral
and political ideas, there was no need for any reticence when he came to deal with the
arts—though in his view they were all inextricably linked.- As interpreted for us by
most of his contemporaries (for his own writings were lost), Lodoli insisted on a wholly
functional architecture in which reason and comfort should be the final arbiters of
style. In this way he was rejecting not merely the late Baroque of his own youth, but
also the classicism that was beginning to replace it. Nothing'shocked his contemporaries
more than his dispassionate investigation of the architecture of antiquity. He certainly
did not condemn it out of hand, but he called its infallible authority into question. Even
the Pantheon, he said, was not perfect; and in any case everyone had interpreted classical
art in a different manner.
As far as current architecture went, Lodoli’s influence was negligible, perhaps
because, as one writer complained, ‘when he is on his own he is so overwhelming that
he gives me indigestion for days afterwards’, and even among critics who shared his
views of the Baroque he was considered to be an ‘impudent impostor’.1 He himself only
practised on one occasion, when he introduced some functional modifications into the
monastery of his own Order, the Minori Osservanti, outside'S. Francesco della Vigna.2
He was once invited by the governor of the Ospedale della Pietà to look at Massari’s
tnodello for the proposed church. When Lodoli began to criticise this on logicalgrounds,
the architect answered: ‘If I were to submit some totally new conception, however
reasonable, I could be quite sure that the plans of some other architect, imitating for
example a façade of Palladio or Vignola, would be chosen instead of mine. And then
who would support my family?’
Yet he made an impact on some of the more open-minded thinkers of the day.
The essayist Gaspare Gozzi must certainly have had Lodoli in mind when he complained
that ‘we put so much into ornamentation that we build more for the eyes of passers-by
than for the people who actually five in houses: and if someone were to come from a
country where houses are used just as shelter from the cold and the rain and were to
see our houses and not their inhabitants, he would think that they must all be giants’.3
Francesco Algarotti was, as usual, somewhat scared of public opinion, and he produced
a rather distorted version of Lodoli’s opinions which failed to please their author,
though he had originally welcomed Algarotti’s interest and the intention had been
1 Letter from the Abate Ortes to Francesco Algarotti of 26 September 1749 in Algarotti, XIV, p. 315,
and Temanza, p. 87.
2 G. A- Moschini, 1815,1, p. 48.
3 Gozzi, I, p. 26—Dialogo tra un librajo e un Forestiere.

--- [Page 55] ---

z 22 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
friendly.1 On the whole, however, Lodoli’s keenest admirers, Andrea Memmo, Angelo
Querini and Filippo Farsetti, all became strong supporters of that very classicism which
Lodoli had questioned.
Lodoli’s views on painting were also exceptional. Although the two men were
satirised together in a bitter and ‘reactionary’ sonnet which accused them of wanting to
weigh the moon’,2 he wholly rejected Conti’s sympathy with fantasy and adopted a
far more austere standpoint. Like Smith’s other friend, the Abate Facciolati in Padua,
with whom he too was in close touch, he arranged his gallery on didactic lines so as to
show the progress of the arts from the Greeks (Le. the Byzantines) until the moderns.3
He acquired so many pictures from Jews and second-hand dealers that they not only
covered his walls but were stacked on the floor as well. Unfortunately, we know almost
nothing precise about his relations with contemporary painters. We are told that they
were extensive; that he used to go and watch the leading artists at work; that he would
obtain commissions for them and be given pictures by them in return; that he would
give advice to people who were decorating their town and country houses. But we
have no idea who these painters and clients were. From what we know of his love of
reason and authenticity it is very hard to believe that Lodoli can have admired Tiepolo,
Piazzetta and the other Venetian ‘history painters’. It seems more likely that he may have
been in close touch with artists like Canaletto and Visentini, with whose work he must
have been very familiar through Consul Smith. Certainly he knew Bartolommeo
Nazari and Alessandro Longhi, both of whom painted portraits of him.4 The latter
picture (Plate 48c) was commissioned by a friend of Lodoli’s, Pietro Moscheni, and it
is one of the very few penetrating studies of the Venetian eighteenth century: no
attempt is made to beautify the rather coarse head with its large bulbous nose, lively eyes
and straggling hair. The painting was soon engraved and at the base of the print were
added the words: ‘P. Carlo de Co:ti Lodoli Veneziano forse il Socrate Architetto’. Lodoli
himself chose the decorative border and this caused a good deal of controversy. Apart
from the usual attributes of the architect—plans, rulers, compasses, etc.—he had his
portrait surrounded by a circular frieze on which was written devonsi unir e fabrica
e RAGiONE—e siA FUNZiON la rappresent azIone—words derived from Vitruvius which
his disciple Andrea Memmo admitted were difficult for most people to understand. At
the base of the portrait were two tablets bearing a text from Jeremiah: ut eruas et
destruas ut Plantes et AEDIFICES (See, I have this day set thee over the nations and
over the kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to
build and to plant)—proof, said his opponents, that he was only interested in destroying.
On the contrary, replied his disciples, he was merely following Socrates who believed
that prejudice must be uprooted before truth could be appreciated.
It is tempting to assume that Lodoli may have admired Alessandro’s father, Pietro.
1 For Algarotti’s reactions to Lodoli see Kauffmann, 1944 and 1955.
2 Biblioteca Correr, Venice—MSS. Cotter, Misc. XI/1348 (1140).
3 Previtali.
4 Tlie portrait by Alessandro Longbi is in the Accademia in Venice. For its history see [Memmo]:
Riflessioni, 1788.

--- [Page 56] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT 323
For we know that Pietro Longhi was highly thought of in other advanced circles of
Venetian society. Significantly, it was in 1750 that Goldoni first hailed him as a ‘man who
is looking for the truth’.1 This was the very period when Goldoni was making his
deliberate and decisive break with the old masked comedies and was trying to reform
the theatre by a return to nature. So it may well have been the painter who inspired the
poet—Longhi had already been painting genre scenes for many years—rather than, as
is usually assumed, the other way round. Seven years later Goldoni returned to the
subject and again praised Longhi for his ‘manner of representing on canvas the charac­
ters and passions of men’.2 Goldoni’s sympathies were ‘advanced’, at least by implica­
tion,3 and he was accused by his opponents of being ‘a corrupter no less of poetry than
of decent behaviour (buon costume)’.4 Could Longhi’s pictures—those httle ‘conversa­
tions, meetings, playful scenes of love and jealousy’—have been interpreted in the same
sense? The very idea seems absurd, despite the fact that early in the nineteenth century a
Venetian historian claimed (with no supporting evidence) that he ‘went so far in
depicting the truth that he was several times punished by the laws’.5 None the less it is
significant that the most enthusiastic praise of his work should have come from men
who were anxious to look more steadily at the actual circumstances of Venetian Use
than was usual at the time.
Despite this, Pietro Longhi was certainly admired and collected by a great number
of patrician families in no way associated with advanced ideas, and in most people’s eyes
his break with fantasy can have had no connection with directly political motives. By
the middle of the eighteenth century the irrational in all the arts was coming under
attack, and the ideas of men like Lodoli were making at least an indirect impact. Thus
we hear that in 1749 Gian Domenico Tiepolo’s series of paintings in S. Polo representing
the Via Crucis met with strong criticism-because ‘all the figures were wearing different
costume—some Spanish, some Slav and some are just caricatures. And people say that
in those days that sort of person was not found and that he has painted them in that way
only out of personal whim.’6 One at least of Longhi’s admirers made it quite clear that
he liked him just because of his rejection of this sort of thing. Gasparo Gozzi, who was
also a strong defender of Goldoni, despite the attacks of his brother Carlo, twice wrote
about Longhi in the Gazzetta Veneta and the Osservatore Veneto which he edited on the
lines of English journals such as The Spectator. On both occasions he compared him to
Tiepolo. In August 1760 he reaches the conclusion that Longhi’s ‘imitations’ of the Efe
he see^ around him are ‘no less perfect’ than Tiepolo’s great scenes of the imagination.7
1 Goldoni: Al Signor Pietro Longhi veneziano celebre pittore—Opere, XIII, p. 187.
2 Goldoni, II, p. 92—dedication of II Frappatore.
3 Dazzi.
4 Goldoni is not actually named, but the allusion to him is clear in the letter from Giuseppe Gennari
to Gaspare Patriarchi of 5 November 1761 published by Melchiori, p. 142.
6 [Paoletti], 1832, p. 122. There is no evidence for this in the Archives of the Inquisitors, and Paoletti.
who calls the artist ‘Antonio’ Longhi, does not seem wholly reliable.
6 Letter horn Pietro Visconti to Gian Pietro Ligari of 19 December 1749 published by Arslan, 1952,
p. 63.
7 Gazzetta Veneta, No. 35, 13 Agosto 1760.

--- [Page 57] ---

z 24 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
Grandeur and grace are each to be found in nature: artistic merit consists in recording
them at their best as do both artists. As a general idea this was not very new. Lione
Pascoli had made much the same point some thirty years earlier when writing about the
hambocciafiti1: ‘Whatever the art that man practises, and in whatever manner, as long as
he does so well, he deserves success and a good reputation.’ But, when applied to actual
artists working in different branches of painting in a rigidly hieratical society, the obser­
vation gains an entirely new force. Pascoli would never have compared Guido Reni and
Cerquozzi in the way that Gozzi was now prepared to compare Tiepolo and Longhi.
A few months later he returned to the question with a much more startling observation.
Longhi was admired, he claimed,2 ‘because he has left behind figures dressed in the
antique manner and imaginary characters, and paints instead what he sees with his own
eyes’. The force of this is somewhat weakened by his later insistence on the amiable
nature of Longhi’s realism, but it is”still a remarkable statement, for it implies that Gozzi
actually considered Longhi superior to Tiepolo.3
Elsewhere Gasparo Gozzi made the same point with far greater social implications,
though without directly naming any artist. He describes in a fable a visit he made to an
old philosopher thought by the world to be mad but in fact the incarnation of true
wisdom.4 As Gozzi enters his isolated house, he looks at the pictures on the walls. ‘Each
picture had beneath it a motto of some good intention. The foreshortened, figures were
not overemphasised, but the movements were all natural, and the figures were all
clothed like living men and women, though they were much more beautiful. Seeing
that I was carefully looking at these noble images, he said: “Here everything is natural.
I know that today most people paint in such a way that everything shown in the picture
seems to come from those clouds that float through the sky in summer in which you
see and yet don’t see what they show. Lots of light, lots of darkness, men and women
who are, and yet are not. My painter has beautified nature as it really is, and nothing
else.” ’ In another room the walls are hung with pictures which show various scenes
from country Use—ploughing, sowing, the gathering of grapes. And the old man
explains that whereas he used to own pictures of beautiful women, he has now given
them away, and instead wishes to honour ‘a class of people, which through its efforts
and the sweat of its brow is the main support of all others’. There can be no doubt who
is referred to in the jibe about exaggerated soreshortenings appearing through the
1 Pascoli, I, p. 31.
2 Osservatore Veneto, 14 Febbraio 1761.
3 Some years later in. 1770 a very vague comparison was to be made between Goldoni and Alessandro
Longbi, Pietro’s son—see Poesie in lode del celebre ritrattista viniziano il signor Alessandro Longhi, In Venezia
MDCCLXX. In the dedication to Goldoni, Girolamo Garganego writes: ‘La discrepanza, che passa fra
voi, e il Signor Alessandro non è, che nei mezzi, di qui vi servite; per altro ambi pingete; e direi quasi,
che a Voi tocca supplir à ciò, a cui non può giugner il pennello di lui... Sarebbe adunque questa relazione,
che passa fra l’uno e l’altro un bastanta motivo per giustificarmi, ma vi è di più. Vi è una vecchia amicizia,
che vi lega l’un l’altro dolcemente, e fa che ognuno di Voi goda delle lodi, e degli encomj dell’altro... .’
Recently the suggestion that there is an affinity between Goldoni and Alessandro Longhi has been made
by Michael Levey, 1959, j>. 156.
4 Gozzi, IV, p. 5—L abitazione d’un filosofo creduto pazzo.

--- [Page 58] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT 325
summer clouds, but the actual pictures described seem to anticipate Millet rather than
anything being produced in contemporary Venice. Gian Domenico Tiepolo, the son
of Giambattista, did paint in the soresteria of the Villa Valmarana near Vicenza some
scenes from rural Use which were certainly realistic by the standards of his day, but
beautiful and sympathetic as they are, they hardly conform to the programme drawn
up by Gozzi’s philosopher—if only because the peasants are always shown eating or
resting rather than at work. Even so, Gian Domenico was certainly the artist most
influenced by the new ideas on society, but he confined his satirical observations of
Venetian life to frescoes in his own villa or to drawings which were presumably
distributed only among friends. Another artist at the end of the century, Francesco
Maggiotto, was so far affected by advanced scientific ideas that he actually invented an
electrical machine and wrote a treatise on the subject.1 But in his many genre paintings
he veered rather unsteadily between a coarse version of Longhi and a sentimental
interpretation of the more ruthless Zompini, and when showing peasants he was
always tempted to revert to a crude Flemish tradition of mockery which did little to
assert the dignity of labour.
In later years Gozzi turned again to the didactic possibilities of painting. In 1782 he
visited Giotto’s Arena chapel in Padua and, struck by the use that the Church had
always made of art, he wrote to a friend2: ‘Who has ever caused to be represented in
painting or sculpture the piety of some of our patricians and had these displayed in
cloisters or schools or other public places? Or the nobility of certain others? The blood
that they have shed for their country, their support for literature, the vast sums spent
on great artists, the honour paid to writers—that is what I should like pictures to repre­
sent.’ In fact, such themes were commonplace in private palaces, but Gozzi’s idea to
make them public was a new one. He must have been aware, however, that in that very
year, in Padua itself, Andrea Memmo was putting into effect a scheme very similar to
the one he was calling for, as will be described in a later chapter.3 -
A much more deliberate attempt to make use of the propagandist effects of art was
planned at about this time by a man whom one would hesitate to include in a chapter on
the Enlightenment were it not for the fact that Gozzi himself and many others saw him
for a year or two as an ‘advanced’ figure battling against the entrenched forces of
conservatism. Giorgio Pisani belonged to that class of poor nobles, the Barnabotti, which
caused the government so much trouble during the eighteenth century.4 As soon as he
entered politics he agitated violently for a series of reforms which were designed far
more to improve the conditions of himself and his friends than to help the State as a
whole. The remedy for all the evils that afflicted Venice lay in a return to the ‘sacred
laws of the pass. But, like Angelo Querini a generation earlier, he was driven by the
logic of his position to oppose the rich and the powerful and above all the increasingly
1 See Andrea Tessier, 1882, pp. 289-315, and Considerazioni elettriche del signor Francesco Maggiotto—
no date or publisher indicated—[Biblioteca Correr, Venice—Misc: 105113].
2 G. Gozzi: Lettere familiari: 1808,1, p. 239—[no date, but 1782].
3 See Chapter 15.
4 For Giorgio Pisani see Grimaldo.

--- [Page 59] ---

326 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
active Inquisitori di Stato. And this won him some support—as well as the attentions
of a government spy. In 1780, after complicated intrigues, he was suddenly elected
Procuratore di San Marco. The appointment was greeted with great enthusiasm.
Congratulations poured in, Gozzi wrote a tribute, and in the pamphlets that were
printed in his honour were included strange allegorical prints that aroused the hostility of
the bienpensants: in one frontispiece a nude youth reclined while a putto carried aloft
the works of Montesquieu which were highly controversial in Venetian society; on
another, steps were shown leading up to a Temple, presumably of Justice, with the
implication that Pisani alone was prepared to climb them; a third set of poems was called,
significantly, Il Patriotismo.1
Giorgio Pisani made matters worse by designing a strange visiting-card, which has
proved difficult to interpret, but which was considered provocative at the time.2 It
shows a young man, leaning on a ramp to which is attached a sail with the words IL
procurator GIORGIO pisani. He holds a swan and above his head there shines a star.
On the left of the card is a cat on a pilaster which holds between its paws a rod on which
is perched the cap of liberty. In the background can be seen the prow of a gondola.
It was the custom when a new Procurator was elected to have the palaces along
which the procession would have to pass hung with pictures which were very often
specially commissioned for the occasion. Here too Pisani and his friends offended the
authorities, though the trouble seems to have been caused by a misunderstanding natural
enough in the prevailing tension. A few years earlier a pedantic and clearly somewhat
crazy Veronese doctor, Lazzaro Riviera, had commissioned a local artist, Felice Boscarati, to paint four allegorical pictures of the most incomprehensible subtlety designed
to illustrate a sort of ideal philosophical and educational system for young men. As
no one had the remotest conception of what the pictures meant he had them copied in
large engravings with a text in garbled Latin underneath and issued an equally incom­
prehensible pamphlet to explain them. There the matter would have rested but for the
fact that Boscarati moved to Venice and was taken up by Pisani as his official painter.
At this stage the pictures were resurrected from the obscurity into which they had
rightly fallen and displayed along the processional route—either by the artist himself
in order to take advantage of his situation or by Pisani’s advisers who rather liked
abstruse symbolism for its own sake. The Inquisitors could hardly be expected to
appreciate this and they decided that the allegories were intended as subversive propa­
ganda.3 They had some reason to be suspicious, for other pictures, much more obviously
1 Componimenti poetici in occasione del solenne ingresso di Sua Eccellenza Missier Zorzi Pisani ... In.
Trevigi MDCCLXXX, presso Antonio Paluello; Poesie per_il solenne ingresso di Sua Eccellenza Mss.r
Zorzi Pisani__In Veneria MDCCLXXX, presso Carlo Palese; Il Patriotismo. Poemetto per 1’ingresso di Sua
Eccellenza M.r Giorgio Pisani... In Veneria CID ID CCLXXX Nella Stamperia Albrizziana.
The set of these pamphlets in the Biblioteca Marciana, Venice [Misc. 212] are all marked in an
eighteenth-century hand with indignant comments such as Perfidioso, Seditioso, etc. For the reputation of
Montesquieu in Venice see Ambri, chapter 6.
2 See the reproduction and comments in Molmenti, 1908, ID, pp. 45-6.
3 This is the only coherent explanation I can give of this very mysterious episode. The paintings and
their destination were referred to by Zannandreis, p. 415, but he is clearly wrong when he says that they

--- [Page 60] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT 327
political, were exhibited outside the Procuratie Nuove showing ‘the sleeping lion; the
scales [of justice] unbalanced, the cap of liberty, the public buildings collapsing, and the
Procurator occupied in rebuilding them and encouraging his own sons to copy him’.1
Even prints that to the unsuspecting eye seem totally harmless caused trouble. Pisani
commissioned from Giampiccoli, one of the most prolific engravers of the day, a view
of the Campo di S. Maria Formosa in which his palace was situated. At the base of the
print were the words eccel.mo Giorgio pisani divi marco merito procuratori ac
UNO EX QUINQUEVIRIS CORRECTORIBUS. UTILIUM SCIENTIARUM CULTU, ET PUBLICAE
libertatis studio praeclaro MOECENATi humanissimo. The combination' of self­
advertisement and references to freedom was considered dangerous and the print was
hurriedly withdrawn.
But the real trouble came on the evening of the procession when a huge celebration
was held in the palace. Spies moved among the guests and nosed in the main reception
room ‘a picture showing Pisani with various emblems denoting Freedom, Power,
Sovereignty, and the collapse of the present form of government and the adoption of a
completely new system’. The atmosphere was fraught with suspicion—even the menus
were carefully noted, for on them were printed two lines in French:
La science, le bon cœur, l’Amour patriotique
Sont-ils les fondements de la République.
The guests must have felt uneasy, and the saying went around: ‘Oggi Bordello, dimani
in Castello; oggi 1’Ingresso, dimani ii Processo. Dio ti guardi.’
The prophecy was apt enough. Four days later the Inquisitors moved into action.
Pisani was arrested, and his painter Felice Boscarati, who was dangerously fond of
satire, also had trouble after the disgrace of his patron.2 Such was the intensity of feeling
that a later writer thought it worth recording as significant the fact that Cristoforo
dall’Acqua, the engraver of the emblematic pictures, had not also been involved in
Pisani’s downfall.3 Thereafter politics and art separated until the French Revolution
and the collapse of the Venetian Republic.
Among the less offensive poems that had been published to celebrate Pisani’s
were especially commissioned for Pisani’s entry. Not only are the prints by Cristoforo dall’Acqua (Biblio­
teca Correr, Venice—Raccolta Gherro, Vol. VIII) all dated before 1780 when there was as yet no question
of Pisani’s election, but Riviera’s own explanatory pamphlets (La Educazione Virile), one in French and
one in Italian, were published in Verona in 1773. [Copies of both versions of this rare pamphlet can be
found in the Biblioteca Correr—Op.P.D. 3577-8.] On the other hand there is good reason to believe that
the pictures or the prints were exhibited in 1780, for this is stated not only by Zannandreis but also
implied by the well-informed Moschini (1924, p. 145), who refers to Dall’Acqua’s prints ‘nell’ingresso
del procuratore Giorgio Pisani’ and we also know of the very close relations between Pisani and Boscarati.
A version of one of the pictures turned up in a London saleroom some years ago (Settecento Paintings
—Arcade Gallery, February-March, 1957), but this is unlikely to be one of the originals, which are des­
cribed by Zannandreis as being large.
1 Grimaldo and Memorie Storiche della Correzione 1780, raccolte in XXIV Lettere Familiari scritte al
N.U. S.r Francesco Donado .. . dal N.U. S.r Gio. Mattia Balbi—Biblioteca Correr, Venice, MSS. Cicogna
2229.
2 Zannandreis, p. 416. 3 Moschini, 1924, p. 145.

--- [Page 61] ---

z 28 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
election was one called II Filosofo dell’Alpi.1 As the title suggests, this enthusiastic work
about the Alps and Nature, which had been translated from the French, was strongly
influenced by Rousseau; and the spirit that informed it was partly responsible for the
outstanding success of almost the only Venetian artist of the eighteenth century who
won unqualified praise from every different kind of patron. Francesco Zuccarelli was
called ‘non mai abbastanza lodato’ by the elder Zanetti as early as 1738, only a few years
after his arrival in Venice from his native Tuscany.2 Consul Smith employed him
constantly and his success with the English, whose love of country house Use and land­
scape painting was already famous, is easy to understand. More significant is the praise
that he won even from those who most strongly rejected the whole conception of
Arcadia. Thus Baretti, chief scourge of the effeminate culture of Venice and close friend
of Dr Johnson, wrote enthusiastically of him.3 And, above all, Giambattista Biffi, the
friend of Beccaria and Verri,4 speaks of him with a rapture that he expresses for no other
painter5: ‘If only you could see this King of landscape painters! What softness, freshness,
waving of leaves I His prints alone are not enough to reveal his merits, good though
they are. Those limpid waters seem like glass on his canvas, and those lively and brilliant
macchiette carry one up to Paradise. Dear Zuccarelli—thanks to you we do not have to
envy the ancients.’ The language alone would betray a follower of Rousseau, and
indeed when Biffi heard later of that philosopher’s death, he wrote in his diary6: ‘The
greatest genius of the century is dead.... He was my father, my guide, my master, my
idol. . . .’ This appreciation of Zuccarelli by such a dedicated disciple shows that the
more scrupulous and deeply felt treatment of nature that was adopted by later artists
was by no means a necessary consequence of that philosopher’s teaching. Purely artificial
Arcadias, suffused in a golden mist, were convincing enough for the most impassioned,
believers in the natural life: while Giuseppe Zais, a more authentic and robust interpreter
of the countryside, was wholly neglected.
Various individuals might support different painters, but towards the middle of the
century there was another, more basic problem that was being widely discussed. How
far could painting be deemed to be of any importance whatsoever in modern life?
Gasparo Gozzi was among the first to tackle the problem in Venice. Writing in 1760 he
admitted that he had been attacked for devoting too much space, in his journalism to
buildings, altars and pictures.7 After making the traditional reply that these represent
1 II Filosofo del!Alpi—Ode del Signor de la Harpe del!Accademia- Francese liberamente ridotta in Versi
Sciolti italiani da Giuseppe Fossati Veneziano. ... In. Venezia per Giacomo Storti, MDCCLXXX.
2 Letter from A. M. Zanetti to A. F. Gori of 23 August 1738 in Biblioteca Marucelliana, Florence
—MSS. B. VIII, 13 p. 289c.
3 Baretti, I, p. 279. 4 F. Venturi, 1957, pp. 37-76.
5 In an unpublished letter to Signor Vacchelli in 1773 in the Biblioteca Govcrnativa, Cremona,
MSS. aa.I.4., the knowledge of which I owe to Professor Franco Venturi: *Se Lei vedesse questo Re dei
pittor paesista [sic], che morbidezza, che fresco, che batter di fronda; Le carte sue unicam.te non bastano
a fame conoscere il preggio, quantunque belle. Quelle acque limpidi veri Cristalli anche sulla tela, le piu
vive, e significanti macchiette spiritosissime imparadiscono. Caro Zuccarelli per te non abiamo ad’invidiare
gli antichi. . . .’
6 F. Venturi, 1957, p. 45. 7 Cazzetta Veneta, 26 Luglio 1760.

--- [Page 62] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT 329
the finest claim to glory of the country that produces them, he refers almost tentatively
to their social value. The arts employ people; consequently money circulates and families
are kept alive. It is plain that Gozzi is here implicitly answering charges by the new
political economists. Eleven years later A. M. Zanetti the Younger obviously feels that
a more considered reply is needed, and he develops at some length the view that painting
must be thought of as one of the useful arts.1 He too begins with the old, accepted
theory of the didactic function of painting: sacred and heroic subjects inspire sacred and
heroic deeds. But he then brings the theory up to date with a notable concession to the
art of his city and century. Painting not only teaches; it also provides mental relaxation.
Even this, however, is merely a fashionable adaptation of the old theory of ‘diletto ed
utile’, and a few pages later, Zanetti feels bound to take part in the more modern
'utilitarian' discussion and justify painting, or rather its patronage, on rather different
grounds. Flourishing artists attract foreigners to their schools; these foreigners take back
works of their masters to their own countries where they are noticed and encourage
foreign princes to buy Italian pictures. Even more, these princes often invite Italian
artists to come and work in their own countries, where they are extremely well paid;
consequently when these artists return to Italy they bring large sums of money with
them. ‘And so,’ he concludes, ‘we cannot doubt that Painting has its part to play in
trade.’ Alas, whatever else might help the Venetian economy at this stage, it was
certainly not the sums—however great—brought back by her artists from England,
Spain, Germany and Russia. None the less, the same sort of argument was echoed in
1772 by an official committee set up to consider the general economic situation: the
liberal arts, it concluded, provide attractions and pleasures and a certain reputation to the
State, for they encourage foreigners to come here.2
It was ideas of this kind that persuaded the State to make its single important
venture into the realm of art patronage. As early as 1724 it had been planned to found
an Academy of Painting and Sculpture ‘so as to attract and encourage to remain here
those foreigners who have to pass Venetian territory on their way to Florence, Bologna
and Rome’.3 When in 1756 the Academy was finally established (after a number of
similar institutions in other towns of Italy and Europe), the Senate hoped, with a
mixture of shrewd calculation and naïveté which is characteristic of much of its legis­
lation at this period, to gain some commercial benefit from the arrangement. The actual
organisation of the body, however, reflected none of the new theories about the value
ofpaintings that had been attracting attention, for the rigid stratification of subject­
matter, based on the absolute supremacy of history painting and the complete subordi­
nation of such inferior branches as view painting, looked back to a much earlier period
rather than anticipated the opinions of the neo-classicists. And the artists themselves
were firmly graded in a hierarchy according to the subjects that they painted.
Very shortly after the institution of the Academy the position of the artist in society
1 In the preface to Della Pittura Veneziana, 1771, p. xiii.
2 Relazione per le risorme, 18 Agosto 1772—quoted by Agostino Sagredo, 1857, p. 208.
3 E. Bassi, 1941, and Fogolari, 1913.

--- [Page 63] ---

330 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
was debated again, but with much more insight into real problems. Andrea Memmo,
himself a patron of great interest to be discussed in a later chapter, was one of the
Inquisitor! alle Arti, who were concerned with the reorganisation of the guilds. Among
his papers there survives a sheet on which he briefly scribbled some queries to himself
when preparing his-report.1 ‘It will be necessary’, he begins, ‘to show how important
it is for the liberal arts to free from the subjection of dues those men who practise them,
and to explain how strange is the temperament of Painters. An example is the famous
living Venetian painter C. Why does C. claim to be freed from taxes?’2 Memmo
looks to other towns for suggestions of reform—Rome, Florence, Bologna and, above
all, Paris. What about the new Academy of Arts at Parma? And to other professions.
What about musicians? And engravers? He looks to the past and reminds himself to
read Vasari’s life of Montorsoli.3 He even wonders what is the device and the name of
the Venetian Academy and whether they could not be improved. Under the protection
of which saint is the Academy placed? And at the end of his remarkably open-minded
survey of the situation he concludes: ‘It is right that the imaginative side of painting
should be exercised freely and with nobility; genius should not be fettered in the practice
of the fine arts. That is why they were called liberal.’ But Memmo, with his interest in
the concept of genius and his appreciation of certain anarchic tendencies in artists, was
exceptional among administrators, even if his ideas in themselves were not wholly new.
The status of the artist remained unchanged, and the only theoretical question that was
seriously discussed—particularly at the Academy prize-giving sessions—was whether
patronage of the traditional kind was necessary for the survival of art or whether, as
Francesco" Algarotti maintained, the existence of great art would of itself bring patrons
into being.
One other development reflected the impact of new ideas on the organisation of
the arts in Venice and helped to bring painting in touch with a more informed, if less
powerful, public opinion than had yet been possible. By the early years of the eighteenth
century there were two spots in the city which were given over to art exhibitions.4 In
the Piazza S. Marco, by the left-hand projecting wing of the Procuratie Nuove adjoining
1 Published in. full in Appendix 6.
2 This almost certainly refers’to Canaletto although he died in 1768 before Memmo began work.
3 This Lise contains an account of the formation of the Accademia di Disegno in Florence.
4 For a full discussion see Haskell and Levey, 1958, pp. 179-85. For the sake of completeness I add
here the only three references to the S. Rocco exhibitions that I have discovered since this article was
published:—
.(i) A report from the papal Nunzio of 20 August 1729 in the Archivio Vaticano—Venezia, n. 180:
*. . . e in tai congiuntura si viddero esposti diversi Quadri di antichi, e moderni Pennelli, con
numero concorso di Popolo . . .’. ~
(ii) Thomas Martyn, p. 448: ‘On S. Rocco’s day, the Signory goes in procession to that Saint’s
church: and the painters of the present Venetian school exhibit their performances in the
Scuola.’
(iii) Nuova Gazzetta Veneta, 21 Agosto 1762: ‘De’ Quadri ku al sommo applaudito il Ritratto del
Serenissimo nostro Doge Marco Foscarini, fatto dal Signor Nassi [sir—Nazari?], e incontrato
a segno che nulla piu si potrebbe desiderare. Vi si videro anche altre Opere de’ Pittori antichi,
e viventi, e tutti ebbero la dovuta lode.’

--- [Page 64] ---

THE ENLIGHTENMENT 331
the church of S. Geminiano, painters sometimes chose to show their work to the public
in a thoroughly casual way when other means were not available. But there were also
far more systematic exhibitions at the Scuola di S. Rocco which probably grew up
quite informally from the processions which the Doge and Senate made to the church
each 16 August (Plate 56). The occasion was a fixed one and every year a number of
■artists took part. By 1751 Francesco Algarotti could write to Mariette that the exhibition
was ‘in some ways the tribunal of our painting like the Salon in Paris’. In fact, however,
the S. Rocco showings never approached the Salon in complexity of organisation or the
attention they attracted. Scarcely any written criticism has survived, and it is difficult to
estimate how seriously they were taken. None the less, in a smaller way than in Paris
but for the same reasons, these exhibitions did help to bring artist and public together,
and did provide a forum where values other than those established by the State and the
aristocracy could be discussed. '
In 1777 a much more official type of exhibition was organised when a number of
nobles asked the members of the Academy to display their work each year at a stand in
the Piazzetta. The artists viewed the arrangements without enthusiasm as they them­
selves were required to meet all the expenses, which were heavy. Many of them did not
have pictures available for exhibition, and the Academy had to resort to loans to make
up the required numbers. Complaints were frequently made and by 1787 the cost had
become crippling and the shows were discontinued. Thus ended State interference in
the arts which had at no time proved very happy.