# CHP-11



--- [Page 1] ---

Chapter n
THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS
-1 -
CONSUL JOSEPH SMITH
THE most important link in Venice itself between the city and the outside world
was an Englishman, Joseph Smith, who became the greatest art patron of his day.
He was born in about 1675, educated at Westminster School and settled in Venice
during the early years of the eighteenth century as a businessman and merchant.1 He
traded extensively with Amsterdam and was concerned with the import of meat and
fish—an activity which sometimes involved him in disputes with the guild of the
Salumieri.2 He quickly became rich and influential and his house was occasionally used
for meetings between the Venetian nobility and English diplomats, which would have
been awkward if held more openly.3 Early in the 1730s he began to take an interest in
publishing which he put into practice by launching the firm of a young man, G. B.
Pasquali. Smith’s concern with this was far greater than merely financial, though money
in any field was always a source of the keenest interest to him. For the first few years of
the new venture he was actively engaged in the intellectual work involved. In 1735, for
instance, he tried to enlist the help of the Florentine scholar A. F. Gori in a reprint of
Guicciardini’s Histories, and he promised in return to find English subscribers for that
antiquarian’s own Museum Etruscum. The difficulties were great: unpublished material
had to be secured from the family; a frontispiece, drawn by the ‘famous painter’ Gian
Domenico Ferretti of Florence, had to be engraved; and a suitable figure had to be
found to whom to dedicate the book. Smith exerted himself in all these and many other
aspects of the production, and also continued to buy books, gems and pictures for
himself and for his clients.4 In 1744 he was made British Consul, a post inferior in status
1 For the fullest account of his career see Parker, 1948, pp. 10 ff., who also publishes his will and other
documents.
2 We can get some impression of Smith’s business activities after about 1740 from the papers of his
notaio,^Lodovico Gabrieli, among which references to Smith are very frequent—see in Archivio di Stato,
Sezione Notarile—Atti del Notaio Lodovico Gabrieli, Buste 7559-7570 (1740-70). Unfortunately I
have not been able to trace who was his notaio before that date. Also in the Archivio di Stato, among the
papers of the Avogaria di Comun—Civil 263/16—is an account of a dispute between Smith and the Arte
de’ Salumieri.
3 Public Record Office—State Papers 99/60: Letter from British Resident dated 18 May 1714: ‘The
Signor Tron, who goes Ambassador to London, sent on Wednesday last to left me know that he would
be glad to see me before his departure, and that he desired to meet me at the house of Mssrs. Williams
and Smith, British Merchants here.’
4 See letters from Joseph Smith to A. F. Gori in Biblioteca Marucelliana, Florence: MSS. B. Vin, 4.
These extend from 1727 to 1744, but the majority were written between 173 5 and 173 7. The Guicciardini
was eventually published by Pasquali in 1738.

--- [Page 2] ---

300 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
to the Residency for which he had hoped. In 1762, a year after resigning the consulship,
he sold the bulk of his library and most of his pictures to King George III. Then five
years later, at the age now of nearly 90, he temporarily resumed the post of consul when
his successor went bankrupt.1 He finally died in 1770 and was buried in the Protestant
cemetery at S. Niccolo al Lido. His taste in pictures reflects much that we should expect
from the two backgrounds, English and Venetian, hinted at in tins outline of his long,
acquisitive and persistent Use.
As a patron of the arts and the owner of a superb library he was well known and
appreciated in Venice, and he was in close contact with nearly all the leading painters.
He was also an assiduous theatre-goer and fond of the opera.2 And his palace on the
Grand Canal near the church of the Apostoli was the meeting-place for a number of the
more adventurously inclined nobles and intellectuals, for besides his great interest in
scholarly works and sine editions, Smith was always keen to publish books which in
hidebound Venice were bound to appear controversial, if not actually subversive.3
Chief among these visitors was the sarcastic, anti-conformist Padre Lodoli who would
come with his lively patrician pupil Andrea Memmo.4 Both of them were to play
important roles in the art world of Venice, and Memmo later acknowledged the influ­
ence that the meetings at Consul Smith’s house had had on his taste. But their great
friendship did not long survive their rivalry in love: both men were courting the
beautiful Giustiniana Wynne, the illegitimate daughter of an English gentleman and a
Greek adventuress.5 Memmo was some sifty-four years younger than the English
Consul and his victory was inevitable. Thereafter Giustiniana was to turn up again and
again as a link between many of the more intelligent patrons and writers of eighteenth­
century Venice.
Smith’s activities and influence may have diminished after 1744, in view of the
government’s discouragement of contacts between the nobility and foreign represen­
tatives, though we do hear from the Resident himself that the Consul was far better
placed from this point of view than his more senior colleague6; and Smith in his claim
to the appointment specifically boasted that he had ‘contracted Friendships with some
Principal men in the Government. . .’.7 In his earlier days at least he had had friendly
relations at various times with the connoisseurs Apostolo Zeno, Francesco Algarotti and
Antonio Maria Zanetti, and Goldoni in the dedication to Smith of one of his plays,
1 Public Record Office—State Papers 99/70—Letters of 10 and 31 January, 10 May and 10 June 1766.
See also Arcbivio di Stato, Venice—Esposizione Principi, Reg. 112.
2 See Goldoni’s dedication to him of 1/ Filososo Inglese in Opere, V, p. 259. He owned a large col­
lection of operatic caricatures by Marco Ricci, A. M. Zanetti and others—see Blunt and Croft-Murray,
pp. 137 if.
3 For many vivid comments on the publishing activities of Smith and Pasquali see the letters from
P. E. Gherardi to L. A. Muratori in the Biblioteca Estense, Modena. See also Chapter 13 of this book.
4 [Andrea Memmo], 1786, p. 1, which in turn refers to Lami: Memorabilia, Firenze 1742, p. 386.
5 B. Brunelli, 1923.
6 Public Record Office—State Papers 99/69, p. 2241.
7 Letter from Smith to the Duke of Newcastle dated 26 August 1740—British Museum: Add. MSS.
32,802, f. 182.

--- [Page 3] ---

THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS 301
II Filosofo Inglese, says that the Englishman had been among his keen admirers. From his
will, drawn up in 1761, we get the impression that by this stage in his long Efe Smith
had few close contacts in Venice beyond those of business. By far the most important
of these were with his client Pasquali, who published catalogues of his gems and some
of his paintings and books as well as many other works of .Eterature and philosophy
which the Consul clearly suggested to him.1 And it is also very likely that he had certain
definite business arrangements with some of the artists whom he employed for himself
and others.2
Two of his most interesting Italian friends Eved in Padua. Of these, one was the
Abate Facciolati, a professor of history in the University, to whom he left three books
‘as a testimonial of my Esteem and respect and of my grateful sense of the friendship
that for so many years [he has] honoured me with’. Facciolati had a remarkable collec­
tion of pictures which was designed to illustrate the history and progress of art beginning
with a series of Byzantine paintings. Such private museums were still most unusual
during the first half of the eighteenth century, though another one of Smith’s friends,
Padre LodoE, collected works of art on a similar principle.3 Smith’s other acquaintance
in Padua was the Marchese Giovanni Poleni, also a professor at the University, and an
engineer and architect of some distinction—in many ways a typical product of the
provincial Enlightenment.4 These relationships suggest that Smith was most at home
in scholarly surroundings.
This is aU we know about the Consul’s participation in the Venetian Efe of his day.
With the EngEsh his links were much stronger. We find him writing to Gori of his
friend the ‘celeberrimo S.r Dottor Mead’,5 the most stimulating art collector of early
eighteenth-century England and the great friend of Sir Isaac Newton, in whom Smith
himself was closely interested.6 His official duties brought him into touch with many
of the most important visitors to Venice, but besides these his house was always open
to English connoisseurs or artists in the city whom he treated with great courtesy. At
one time or another John Breval, Horace Walpole, Richard Wilson, Sir Joshua Rey­
nolds, James Wyatt and Robert Adam were aU welcomed by him.’ But no one really
liked him. Walpole characteristically jeered at him as ‘the Merchant of Venice’; Lady
1 See p. 299, note 4. Grosley, who was in Venice in 1758, writes—U, p. 99—‘LJImprimerie de Jean­
Baptiste Pasquali, l’une des meilleures et des plus occupées de Venise, roule, pour la plus grande partie,
sur les fonds de M. Joseph Smith; riche Anglois qui a vielli dans le Consulat d’Angleterre à Venise.’
. _ 2 The case os Canaletto is discussed separately, but it seems likely that Smith had some similar arrange­
ment with Visentini.
3 See Previtali.
4 There are two very friendly letters from Poleni to Smith, dated 9 and 17 April 1747, in the Biblio­
teca Marciana—MSS. Ital:Cl.X. Cod CCLXXXVIII—6580. In these Polòni asks Smith to obtain some
drawings for him from Visentini. There is an answer to the first of these letters, dated 14 April 1747, in
which Smith refers to ‘l’antica mia servitù et perpetua stima’. _
6 See p. 299, note 4. The undated letter is on page 211.
6 Smith and Pasquali published many books referring to Newton. In a note on page 30 of his Tempio
della Filosofia, 1757, the poet Arrighi-Landini tells how Smith supplied him with a copy of Pope’s famous
epitaph.
7 Levey, in Burlington Magazine, 1959, pp. 139 and 143.

--- [Page 4] ---

302 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
Mary Wortley Montagu found the self-congratulation with which he rendered her a
service overwhelming; and James Adam burst out in a fit of rage: ‘As to Smith’s
flummery ’tis all good for nothing with him—mere words, of course, that have no
meaning except when he has some favour to ask.’1 Even across the centuries we sense
something vaguely unattractive about the man—the obsequiousness of his dealings
with the King; the cynicism of his first marriage to the rich but mad operatic singer
Katherine Tofts; his grotesque though pathetic pursuit of Giustiniana Wynne; and
finally his second marriage, when aged 82, to the sister of John Murray, the Resident—
the very job that he had wanted for himself.
Despite the unease that he inspired in his fellow-countrymen and despite the fact
that he lived abroad virtually all his life, like so many Englishmen in a similar situation
he insisted on retaining the atmosphere of his native land. When Mme du Boccage
visited Venice in 1757 she noted that Smith’s palace was ‘entirely in the English taste;
the very tables and locks of the gates are made after the manner of that country’.2
And yet this palace was by that time full to capacity with Italian paintings, not all
of which would have suited the taste of an English gentleman at home. When he began
collecting in the 1720s, Smith turned first to Sebastiano Ricci, at that time considered
the finest painter in Venice. The veteran Lazzarini had virtually retired; his pupil
Tiepolo was still too young to be known outside a restricted circle. Yet Ricci, for all
the esteem in which he was held, was employed far more outside Venice, principally by
the court of Turin, than in the city itself, where his most important commissions were
largely confined to the Church, and henceforward to Smith.
The pictures that Smith bought or commissioned from the artist were painted in
his most scintillating manner, and many of them were freely adapted from Veronese.3
The most important were seven large pictures of themes from the New Testament
which he hung together in a special room in his palace and which he had engraved and
described in 1749, along with seven cartoons by the Bolognese Carlo Cignani, an artist
enormously admired in early eighteenth-century Venice, which were hung in another
room.4 These paintings from the New Testament may well be connected with a similar
series that Ricci was engaged on for the court of Turin at much the same moment.6
In fact, apart from their sine quality all Smith’s Riccis are of a kind which suggests
either that they were bought from the artist or his heirs after his death or that, if
1 Letter from James to Robert Adam dated 20 August 1760.1 am most grateful to Mr John Fleming
for showing me a copy of this letter. _
2 Mme du Boccage, I, p. 146.
3 For a full account of these pictures see Blunt, Burlington Magazine, 1946, pp. 262-8, and 1947,
p. 101.
4 The Abate Pietro Ercole Gherardi, who wrote the Descrizione of Smith’s Cignanis and Riccis, was
a Modenese friend of Muratori with whom he engaged in a long correspondence, now in the Biblioteca
Estense, Modena.
In the Galleria di Minerva, VI, 1708, p. 83, an anonymous writer said of Cignani, ‘nessuno ha saputo
fin’ora vendere in vita i suoi Quadri a si alto prezzo’.
6 This has been suggested by Blunt, 1957, p. 12, note 6, who discusses all the Sebastiano and Marco
Ricci drawings owned by Smith.

--- [Page 5] ---

THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS 303
commissioned, Smith had as yet formed no distinctive taste of his own. The remaining
thirteen religious and classical compositions are of subjects that were commonplace in
the artistic repertory of the day, and the fact that Smith also owned a series of studies of
heads copied from Veronese strongly suggests that he acquired a section of the artist’s
studio en bloc—for such' a commission would be most unusual. And it is likely that he
acquired the 211 miscellaneous drawings which date from various periods in Ricci’s Use
in the same way.
Many of these pictures have landscape backgrounds by Sebastiano’s nephew, Marco,
and he too was very fully represented in Smith’s collection. Once again it is not clear
what proportion of the 42 paintings and nearly 150 drawings were directly commis­
sioned by him, for the subjects offer no clue and one of the drawings is dated 1710,
when it is most unlikely that the two men knew each other. Some of them were
engraved by Antonio Maria Zanetti in a book which recorded a few of his own paintings
by Marco Ricci and which he dedicated to Francesco Algarotti in 1743.1 The subjects
include fantastic Roman ruins, genre scenes from country life and a number of land­
scapes (Plate 55b).
Among other artists whom Smith was especially patronising in the 1720s was
Rosalba Carriera. There are records that she knew him in 1721 and was working for
him by 1723 so that she must have been among the very first painters he employed—
indeed her name appears first on the list of his pictures which he drew up when he sold
them to George III.2 Throughout 1725, 1726 and 1728 she was receiving payments from
him, and we also know that Smith obtained commissions for her from other English­
men.3 In the end his large collection of pastel portraits formed the best known group of
her paintings in Venice: in particular it contained what was universally recognised to be
her masterpiece, Winter, represented (in Smith’s words) by a ‘Beautiful Female covering
herself with a Pelisse allowed to be the most excellent this Virtuosa ever painted.’4 Smith
commissioned two versions of this, and after keeping the one he liked best for himself,
he sent the other to a friend (or client).5 He obviously guarded it jealously, for writing
to Rosalba from London in 1735, a Mr Robert Dingley asked for a picture ‘of a pretty
young country girl... in the style of the Winter in Mr Smith’s collection.... There is
no need to say anything to Mr Smith about this. . . .’6
Such then are the outlines of Smith’s career as collector and patron until about 1730.
He was now aged 55, and living in the Palazzo Balbi near the Rialto where he had
1 Francisco Contiti Algarotto, Eruditissimo Viro, Bonarumque Artium Cultori, Hasce XXIV Tabulas Olim
a Marco Ricci Bellunensi Colorib. Expressas, Quae Extant in Aedibus Joseph Smith, et Antonio Mariae Zanetti,
D.A.F. Qui eas del. incid. et in lucem edit Venetiis Anno MDCCXLIII D.DP.
2 Cust, p. 153.
3 See her accounts for 21 May 1726, published by Malamani, 1899, p. 147: ‘Dato le Quattro Stagioni,
per spedire a Londra, al Sig. Smith.’
4 Cust, p. 153.
5 Letter from Smith to Rosalba Carriera (undated) in Biblioteca Laurenziana, Florence: Cod.
Ashburn, 1781, Vol. IV: ‘Giacché Ella intende di voler finire anche l’altro Inverno, quando ciò si potesse
terminare per Lunedi desiderei molto volentieri vederlo à confronto dell’altro per poter allora con più
fondamento risolvere quali di Due inviare all’atnico.’ 6 Malamani, 1899, p. 134.

--- [Page 6] ---

304 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
settled on arrival; in 1731 he bought the country house at Mogliano near Treviso
which he had leased four years earlier from the Procuratore di San Marco, Gerolamo
Canal.1 In these two properties he displayed his paintings and drawings by Sebastiano
and Marco Ricci, Carlo Cignani and Rosalba Carriera and probably also Piazzetta with
whom he was in touch during these years.2 It was already the most important collection
of modern art to be found in Venice (and there was also a growing number of old
masters), but reflected no particular originality of outlook. From now on, however,
there seems to be a change in direction, and Smith began to accumulate a series of
pictures which made his palace unique as an expression of individual taste. Essentially
the shift reflected—consciously or not—one that was taking place at the same time in
his native England: a move away from large-scale history pictures towards views and
landscapes, though in his case not towards portraits. It is indeed remarkable that though
he was anxious to have portraits of all the artists who worked for him, he never seems
to have commissioned one of himself.
The new direction of his patronage was marked above all by his employment of
Canaletto: the relations between the two men were central in the careers of both.
Though there is no conclusive record of their having been in touch before 1729, it
seems likely that Canaletto actually began working for Smith a year or two earlier,
by which date he was already a well-known artist with a European clientèle. Thereafter
Smith directed his whole output almost entirely into English channels, and conspicu­
ously into his own collection. The exact nature of their relations has been extensively
and authoritatively discussed, but remains uncertain.3 There is, however, no doubt
whatsoever that Smith’s control over the artist was such that from a very early period
commissions for his works were very frequently, if not exclusively, made through him.4
This was not altogether an easy matter, for both artist and business man had notoriously
mean characters: ‘nor is it the first time’, Smith wrote angrily after a brush in 1729,
‘[that] I have been glad to submitt to a painter’s impertinence to serve myself and
friends’.® He was, however, not the man to be put off by difficulties of this kind, and he
retained his self-appointed role as the agent through whom Canalettos were purchased.
It is probably this that the Swedish visitor Count Tessin meant when he said in 1736
that for a term of four years Canaletto was engaged by Smith to work exclusively for
him.6 Certainly besides the pictures that Smith obtained for others he was keeping a
very large number for himself—far more than the fifty-three at present in the Royal
Collection7—so that, if we include in the phrase ‘work exclusively for him’ those
1 Archivio di Stato, Venice—Dieci Savi alle Decime, No. 1309, £ 84V, and Sezione Notarile, Vettor
Todeschini, Atti 12,727, c. 13 5V and 12,731, c. 306V. ~
2 Smith sent works by Piazzetta to Samuel Hill in November 1729—see Chaloner.
3 Parker, pp. 9 ff.
4 For instance in June 1730 John Conduitt ‘desired Mr S[mith] to procure 3 pictures from Canaletto’
—see p. 290, note 1. .
5 Letter from Smith to Samuel Hill of 17 July 1730 published by Chaloner. 6 Siren, p. 107.
7 For instance a further fourteen appear in one sale catalogue alone—Christie’s, 16 May 1776: A
Catalogue of the Capital and Valuable Collection of Italian, French, Flemish and Dutch Pictures . . . of foseph
Smith, Esq., Some of the implications of this and other sale catalogues are discussed in Appendix 5.

--- [Page 7] ---

THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS 305
pictures that Smith was commissioning for other customers, there is no reason to doubt
the substantial truth of Tessin’s observation.
Smith’s first Canalettos were six views of S. Marco and its immediate surroundings,
larger than anything he had painted until then, bold, free and almost impressionistic.1
They are among his finest works, and in many ways the antithesis of what was to be his
characteristic style when later working for the Consul and other English patrons.
Already there is a change in the fourteen pictures which he painted for him between
1730 and 1735: the treatment is now less dramatic and much more sober. This change
corresponds to the evident purpose of the series. With two large exceptions—depicting
regattas—the group consists of twelve small views of Venice, chosen not because of the
interest, importance or beauty of the objects to be represented, but purely so as to
achieve a documentary record of the whole Grand Canal. Up and down, very system­
atically, the painter has worked his way through this great artery, leaving as fine and
yet as unpretentious a memorial as any city has ever had. Such an attitude to art was
quite new. Painters, even the most distinguished ones, had often been employed to
record important scenes from contemporary Use for their patrons or merely buildings
and landscapes which were particularly associated with them. Other artists had exploited
the ‘picturesque’ elements of back streets and slum Use and ruins. Yet others had painted
individual buildings of outstanding architectural interest. But these are all the very
elements that are missing in this series. With his eye firmly on the Canal the artist here
often records the palaces and churches in such steep perspective that we are not intended
to admire them in themselves. There is something curiously prosaic and business-like
in this approach of a painter who had until now shown himself so dramatic, indeed
romantic. It is almost as if the patron were drawing up a prospectus, a sort of visual
catalogue, of Canaletto’s abilities. Can this in fact have been the real motive for these
pictures? There is some evidence for the theory. In 1735 Visentini’s engravings of the
series were published, thus giving tourists an easy opportunity to get to know it.' A
year later Tessin reports that Canaletto has been engaged to paint exclusively for Smith
for four years. And, paradoxically enough, it seems that at this very time Canaletto had
virtually ceased working for Smith.
There are no paintings by Canaletto in the Consul’s collection between the series
engraved by Visentini and a number some ten years later. But it was at this very moment
that Canaletto obtained some of his most important commissions from English visitors.
If the Visentini series was indeed intended as an advertisement—if the pictures were
painted, in fact, with the engravings in mind—the scheme was remarkably successful.
For it was during the last half of the 1730s that Canaletto painted twenty views for the
Duke of Bedford, another series of twenty for Sir Robert Hervey, and seventeen for the
Earl of Carlisle. In all these groups the artist pays far more attention to the accurate
delineation of specific buildings than he had done when working for Smith. And it is
now that we first notice the mannerisms, the harshness, the signs of studio assistance—all
1 Constable, 1976.

--- [Page 8] ---

3oó PATRONS AND PAINTERS
the deterioration that was to become charactèristic of a painter ‘whom the English have
spoilt’. -
It is impossible to tell exactly what Smith was doing during this period. No doubt
he was buying old masters extensively. And he must also have been forming and adding
to his great collection of drawings—in 1734 Sebastiano Ricci died and it was probably
then that Smith acquired much of the contents of his studio. Many illustrated editions
of books were pubhshed by Pasquali during these years, and Smith retained the original
drawings most of which were by Visentini.1 ,
We know too that he was buying gems and cameos, and from the many letters
that he wrote about these to the Florentine antiquary A. F. Gori in 1737 and 1738 we
can derive our only explicit indication of his artistic tastes.2 He emerges as an enthusiastic
and apparently discriminating collector. ‘It makes no difference to me,’ he writes,3
‘whether the stone be cut or the figures in relief or of what size they be, as long as the work­
manship is excellent; and although I do like modern things when they are extremely
beautiful, I must be understood always to give preference to the antique, without
however blindly praising a bad piece just because it is antique. If I come across beautiful
things, I am glad to pay what they are worth.’ Many people, including, naturally, the
dealers of the time, went out of their way to praise Smith’s choice of stones,4 but not
everyone would have acknowledged his claims of generosity or even taste. Girolamo
Zanetti later said that his brother Antonio Maria who copied Smith’s gems for publica­
tion had been extremely badly paid, and he commented scathingly on the quality and
authenticity of many of the Consul’s ‘antiques’,5 despite the fact that Smith always
showed himself careful to distinguish between ‘the good or, rather, excellent works of
the sixteenth century when fine masters were alive’ and those produced in more recent
years.®
It was at about this time too that the connoisseur John Breval visited Smith’s
collection and was shown a little statuette which represented ‘seemingly an Aesculapio1 Blunt and Croft-Murray, pp. 67 if.
2 See p. 299, note 4.
3 On 30 March 1737: ‘Giacché Ella si dimostra si inclinata à favorirmi & satisfare il mio genio per tali
Cose, Io Le dico che tutto ugualmente mi piace, che la pietra sia incisa ò con figura ò figure di rilievo et di
ogni grandezza purché il lavoro ne sia eccelente, et benché dico ch’applico à cose moderne quando sono
belle assai, vorrei essere inteso, di sempre dar la preferenza all’antico senza però ciecamente stimare una
Cosa cattiva perche è antica. Capitando cose bello hò Cuore anche di pagarle quello vagliono. . . .’—
' Biblioteca Marucelliana, Florence-—see p. 299, note 4. •
4 The dealer Lorenzo Masini said that Smith’s medal cabinet was outstanding in its day for quality—
see Zabeo, p. 16.
8 Letter from Girolamo Zanetti dated 21 August 1751 in. Biblioteca Marucelliana, Florence—MSS.
B. VIII, 13, p. 170: ‘Vengo al Pasquali. La faccenda appartiene tutto al Console Brittanico Smith. Mio
fratello dissegnò le gemme e i Cammei, e gli Vantaggiò di molto colla matite perchè gli originali non sono
di quella perfezione, che si vorrebbe far vedere. Molti, se non ¡sbaglio, sono moderni . . .’ [in margin:
‘Fu assai male ricompensato.’]
6 Letter from Smith to Gori of 13 April 1737: ‘. . . Non rifiuto le cose buone ò per meglio dire le
ottime del secolo XVI quando viveano de bravi maestri, ne in niuna città fiorirono più che in Firenze,
.mà questa Testa d’Adriano è molto piu recente, e quasi quasi direi chi l’ha fatta ...’—Biblioteca Marucelliana, Florence—see p. 299, note 4.

--- [Page 9] ---

THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS 307
Priapus; with a Pudendum of monstrous proportion’ as well as some more conventional
sculptures, the Cignani cartoons and various books and antiquities.1
Early in the ’forties he resumed the patronage of contemporary artists on a large
scale, and also engaged in two interesting and important transactions. In 1741 he sold
a number of paintings, which are now impossible to identify, to the Elector of Saxony2
and in the same year, or thereabouts, he bought a collection of Dutch and Flemish
pictures from the widow of the artist Pellegrini.3 Indeed, it was almost certainly from
her that he acquired at least one of his masterpieces of Dutch painting—Vermeer’s
Lady at the Virginals (now in Buckingham Palace). It has been claimed that theWermeer
greatly influenced Canaletto’s development,4 but though the theory is a tempting one, it
is difficult to substantiate. If this picture, which was then in no way singled out for special
praise and, indeed, was attributed to the secondary painter Frans van Mieris, really
came from Pellegrini’s widow, it arrived at a time when Canaletto’s style was already
fully formed and his best days were nearly over. In any case the subtly modulated
lighting and precision of the Dutch interior bears little relation to the huge views which
Canaletto was then painting. For it was now, soon after the outbreak of the war of the
Austrian succession in 1740, which so cut down the numbers of English tourists, that he
once again began to work for his most persistent patron.
Canaletto’s return to Smith marked a very striking change both in his style and in
his subject-matter. He entirely gave up the small-scale views of Venice, on which his
international reputation was securely based, and turned instead to grandeur and fantasy
and a vastly increased range of subjects. There was quite possibly a second visit to
Rome, perhaps with Smith, and this led to the painting of six views of ancient Roman
monuments. These were the largest pictures that Canaletto ever painted for Smith,
and if for no other reason they must have made a great impact among those in his
collection. And their subjects made them unique in Venice. With their concentration
on the grandest of antique monuments they were like some signal to show that Rome
and Roman values were once more about to resume the leading role in Italian art. Yet
this is still Rome as seen by the outsider, and consequently lacks that matter-of-fact
element which was so characteristic of the Venetian views of his earlier years. Though
the paint is now harsh, there is in these pictures something of a return to the dramatic
vision of his very first pictures. It is significant that Smith should have wished for views
of antiquity only and ignored the contemporary Rome of Pannini; yet it is hard to see
these playing more than a symbolical role in the rise of the neo-classic.
This is worth stressing because the next few paintings commissioned from Canaletto
so clearly were intended to portray the style of architecture that Smith particularly liked.
It was in 1744 that Canaletto painted the ‘13 Door Pieces ... [of] the principal Buildings
1 Breval, 1738,1, p. 230.
2 Blunt and Croft-Murray, p. 11.
3 ibid., p. 14, and, for the list of Smith’s Dutch and Flemish pictures, pp. 19-23, and Vivian, 1962,
PP- 330-3:
4 Most forcibly and, to my mind, least convincingly by Brandi, pp. 60 if.

--- [Page 10] ---

zo8 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
of Palladio’.1 In fact, as Smith recognised in a note at the end of his catalogue, by no
means all the pictures in the series do represent that architect’s works, but this first
reference by him reveals clearly enough what was the aim of the group—to show the
‘most admired Buildings at Venice’. And the vast majority of these were by Palladian
architects of the sixteenth century. Yet the series as a whole is not altogether consistent.
Alongside the bland, almost mathematically precise, views of the Rialto as planned by
Palladio or the Courtyard of the Carita are quite imaginary scenes such as the Horses of
St Mark’s detached from the church and placed on the piazza or a fantastic interpretation
of the Scala dei Giganti. These are among the first ‘caprices’ in Canaletto’s’work and it
is tempting to link them with the arrival in Venice in 1743 of Francesco Algarotti, who
was later to show such enthusiasm for this type of picture and who was at this very time
in touch with Smith. It is equally possible that Canaletto derived the idea from Pannini
on his visit to Rome a year or two before, and it must certainly have been about
now that he painted for Smith his two capricci with Roman ruins in ‘a bold frank man­
ner’.2 Yet though such pictures are more readily associated with the fanciful Algarotti
than the more phlegmatic temperament of Smith, it was to his English patron that
Canaletto dedicated in these very years by far his most poetic excursions into the field
of the imaginary—the series of thirty-one etchings ‘altre prese da i Luoghi altre ideate’
(Plate 55a). These represent a side of Canaletto’s art which is totally absent in his
paintings for the Consul, though it is occasionally hinted at in his drawings—an appreci­
ation of distances, worn columns overhung with plants, the solitary black bird, arches,
mountains. It is a deeply felt, informal, often poignant vision, in which—almost for the
last time—Canaletto’s genius blazes at full power. Very soon afterwards he left for
England apparently on Smith’s recommendation and for nearly ten years there was
little contact between the two men.
After Canaletto’s departure in 1746 Smith turned to two other artists to continue
the series of overdoors illustrating Palladian architecture.3 Antonio Visentini had already
been employed by him for more than fifteen years as an architect and book illustrator
and Francesco Zuccarelli was an established landscape painter, who worked a great
deal for Smith, though it is not clear whether his ‘6 Landscapes representing the story
of Rebecca with Jacob and Esau’ and many other pictures had already been painted
before 1746 or whether the commission of that year brought about the first contact
_ between the two men. In any case Zuccarelli’s part in the enterprise was a minor one
despite its greater artistic quality. It consisted of adding attractive decorative landscapes
of the Venetian kind for which he was famous to the architectural views painted by
Visentini. The architecture was exclusively English and consisted of a series of country
houses and surroundings which neither he nor his patron had ever seen. All were in the
style which Lord Burlington and his followers had raised into a dogmatic canon of
1 Most of these overdoors are dated 1744, but the Horses of St Mark’s is dated in. Roman fashion A.u.c.
1332, which is equivalent to 1753. Sir Anthony Blunt has solved the problem by suggesting that Canaletto
accidentally added an extra x—see Exhibition of The King’s Pictures, 1946-7, No. 440.
2 Cust, p. 153. The settings are imaginary, but appear to have been inspired by Padua.
3 Blunt, 1958, pp. 283-4, and Vivian, 1963, pp. 157-62.

--- [Page 11] ---

THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS 309
taste—the Palladian. Five of the eleven pictures portray works by Inigo Jones, two by
Lord Burlington, two by Colen Campbell, one by Roger Morris, and one—curiously
enough—by Vanbrugh, though the example chosen shows him at his most Palladian.
In some cases separated buildings are combined, but none of these capricci includes the
playful distortions of Canaletto’s Horses of St Mark’s and it is clear that the genre was
not inherently sympathetic to Smith. The pictures were based primarily on engravings
taken from Colen Campbell’s Vitruvius Britannicus, and as far as architectural details are
concerned they are mostly of great, almost programmatic accuracy. The significance of
the whole series is made absolutely clear by the portrait that Nogari was commissioned
to paint for him of Inigo Jones, taken from ‘Vandyke, with the plan of the Banquetting
House in his hands’.1 Smith also brought out many editions of the works of Jones and
Palladio, and in 1767 he published one of the manuscripts in his collection by the
seventeenth-century theorist TeoFilo Gallacini. The title was indicative: Trattato sopragli
errori degli architetti, and within a very short time the book was brought up to date by
Antonio Visentini with a series of bitter attacks on the Baroque architects and their
successors down to Piranesi. The effect was not missed by the Venetians who frequented
Smith’s palace, and later Andrea Memmo was to write that ‘a great number of books on
architecture which I was able to see in his house, and the guidance of Signor Antonio
Visentini, made me pick out and prefer that style which is called pure and simple’.2
This devotion to the strict canons of neo-Palladianism in 1746 shows Smith
conforming closely to the English taste at the very time when it was wearing somewhat
thin in his own homeland. But it coincided with a move towards classicism that was felt
in all branches of Venetian art during the ’forties and that Smith’s patronage during this
decade did much to promote. Despite the commission of an important work from
Tiepolo, which came to nothing because it was expropriated by Algarotti for the court
of Dresden,3 Smith tended to move away from history painting and fantasy and turn
more than ever to landscapes and architectural paintings proclaiming the virtues of
sobriety. This tendency continued in the’fifties—in the first year of that decade Visentini
built a new classicising marble façade for his palace4—but by now his patronage of
contemporary artists was greatly diminished. Zuccarelli went to England in 1752 and
it may therefore have been at this period that Smith began employing Zais,5 whose
landscapes he did not think worth including in the batch of pictures that he later sold to
George III. In the same year, however, he acquired some of his most magnificent
drawings—including many by Castiglione and the Carracci—as well as some old
master paintings from the heirs of Zaccaria Sagredo.® He also bought some more
pictures from Canaletto, among them a number of English views, on that artist’s return
1 Cust, p. i6i.
2 [Andrea Memmo], 1786, p. 1.
3 Haskell, in Burlington Magazine, 1958, pp. 212-3. And see later. Chapter 14.
4 Gradenigo, p. 5.
6 G. A. Moschini, 1924, p. 82: ‘Che se Giuseppe Zais e Francesco Zuccarelli ebbero un gran protettore
nel Console Smith. . ..’
8 See document published by Blunt and Croft-Murray, p. 24.

--- [Page 12] ---

3io PATRONS AND PAINTERS
from London in 1755. These, together with the Riccis and Cignanis and most of his
larger works, were hung in his palace; at his country house he kept the paintings by
Dutch and Flemish artists, a number of Zuccarellis and many of the old masters.1
By this time he was already nearly 80 and was making plans to dispose of his
library and collections. In 1755 he published an inventory of his books, grandly but
slightly absurdly called the Bibliotheca Smithiana, almost certainly designed as an
elaborate sale catalogue, and a year later he began negotiations with the English royal
family. These were interrupted almost at once by the outbreak of the Seven Years
War.2 '
Disappointment, old age and the disruption of trade deeply affected him, and he
began to withdraw more and more from social Use. In 1756 he gave up his box in the
theatre of S. Giovanni Crisostomo3 and four years later he resigned the consulship and
wrote that he wished to return to England, ‘but first, having spent all my vacant time
in amusements of admiring the sine arts and possessing considerable collections of tilings
relating thereto . . .’ he proposed to visit the principal towns of Italy, as he knew only
Venice.4 At just this time James Adam met him and wrote5 that he was ‘devilish poor
& should he live a few years longer which he may do, he will die a Bankrupt... he
has a fine collection which he ought to sell if vanity wou’d allow him, but he is literally
eaten up with it’. However, in 1762, after difficult negotiations he at last managed to
sell most of his best pictures, books, drawings and gems to King George III.® Even so,
enough remained to cover his walls. His vitality was impressive: he still actively engaged
in business, including picture dealing, and in 1766 he again became Consul for a few
months. But, apart from this, he seems to have lived a retired fife, attracting little
attention from native Venetians or tourists. He finally died in 1770, two years after
Canaletto, with whom he will always be associated.
- ii -
MARSHAL SCHULENBURG
Another foreigner was commissioning and collecting pictures in Venice at much the
same time as Joseph Smith, and the contrasts in background and activities between
Marshal Schulenburg and the English Consul are reflected very closely in their aesthetic
tastes. There is no record that they were on close terms, and although they often
employed the same artists, their collections were very different.
1 Orlandi, pp. 79-80 and 206 (under Pellegrini and Zuccarelli). In 1757 Robert Adam visited Consul
Smith at Mogliano and saw there ‘as pretty a collection of pictures as I have ever seen, not large pictures
but small ones of great masters and very finely preserved .. .’. Fleming, 1959, p. 171.
2 Parker, p. 11.
3 Archivio di Stato, Venice: Atti del notaio Lodovico Gabrieli, 7564, p. i2v, 22 Marzo 1756.
4 Letter from Smith to William Pitt of 29 October 1760—Public Record Office, State Papers 99/68,
f. 96.
6 Letters from James to Robert and Jenny Adam of 20 and 27 August 1760 published by Fleming,
1962, p. 270. 8 See Appendix 5.

--- [Page 13] ---

THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS 3”
Johann Matthias Schulenburg, who came from a Saxon family, was born in 1661.1
After studying in France and Germany, he served as a professional soldier in most of
the great wars fought throughout Europe at the turn of the century. He fought for the
Hungarians and for the House of Savoy; he fought for the Saxons in a scries of engage­
ments against Charles XII of Sweden about which he liked to talk in later life; and he
fought in the wars of the Spanish Succession, serving under Prince Eugene at Malplaquet. It was this latter connection that brought about his association with Venice,
for when in 1715 the Republic appealed to Eugene for help against the Turks he advised
them to turn to Schulenburg. This advice was fully justified by the Marshal’s'brilliant
defence of Corfù against Turkish onslaughts in 1715 and 1716. The campaign, which
was commemorated by various works of art commissioned both by Schulenburg
himself and by the State, earned him the enthusiasm of Europe and the particular
gratitude of Venice, which erected a statue to him and awarded him a life pension of
5000 ducats a year.2 He continued to serve the Republic, though there was no further
opportunity for actual fighting, and after travel all over Italy as well as to London,
Berlin, Dresden and Holland, he settled in Venetian territory. He divided the last years
of his life between Venice and Verona, where he died and was given a splendid funeral
in I747?
Schulenburg remained a grandiose figure in his retirement. He was closely related
to the Hanoverian dynasty and was on friendly terms with half the crowned heads of
Europe, whose portraits—Bourbons and Hapsburgs, Farneses and Hohenzollerns—
lined the walls of the Palazzo Loredan in which he lived. They would call on him
during their visits to Venice and write to him for help and advice in problems of all
kinds. Thus Crown Prince Frederick of Prussia (later the Great) applied to him for a
young castrato of 14 or 15, but was disappointed that Schulenburg could only find ‘une
fille âgée de près de trente ans’.4 The old Marshal himself would have seen the arrange­
ment in a different light. He liked talking to his guests about women,5 and a young
English nobleman who fell ill during his tour of Italy was disconcerted to have his
doctor sent for by Schulenburg ‘and strictly required ... to tell whether or not I had
been claps.® To these younger men Schulenburg with his lavish hospitality and stories
of bygone wars was ‘un vieux bonhomme’ or ‘the oddest old fellow in the world’. But
though amiable enough, he remained excessively proud and could be very rude. The
will that he drew up in 1740 reveals a commanding spirit, keen to assert its authority
over distant descendants—he had no children of his own—and determined to maintain
1 The main source for Schulenburg’s life is Leben und Dentwurdigkeiten Johann Mathias Reichsgrafen
von der Schulenburg, Leipzig 1834.
..... 2 Romanin, VID, p. 53.
3 There is a drawing for the procession at his funeral in Verona—Archivio di Stato, VIII—Vari No.
35. He was in Venice 1729/30; 1732-4; 1737-41, and in Verona 1734-6; 1742-7.
4 Leben, II, p. 312.
5 De Brosses, I, p. 142: ‘C’est un bien honnête vieillard, qui entend la guerre à merveille et fort mal
la morale. Il nous fait sur le chapitre des filles de fréquents sermons, peu écoutés et point du tout suivis.. ..'
• Letter from Lord Rockingham in Verona to Lord Essex dated 2 February 1733—British Museum,
Add. MSS. 27,733, f. 13.

--- [Page 14] ---

312 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
in every way the noble status of his family.1 At one time or another nearly all the artists
whom Schulenburg employed were commissioned to record his own dropsical features.
Piazzetta drew him several times (Plate 53a), he was painted by Bartolommeo Nazari,
Giuseppe Nogari, Giacomo Ceruti, Gian Antonio Guardi, Francesco Simonini and
many others, sculpted by Corradini and Morlaiter, engraved by Pitteri. His principal
battles were painted by Simonini, whom he apparently took on his campaigns with
him, and in 1726 he employed Canaletto to paint a view (probably taken from a print)
of Corfu, the scene of his greatest triumph.2 All these artists he treated with royal
■generosity.3
Schulenburg’s collecting began suddenly in 1724 with a large purchase of old
master paintings and sculpture from a lawyer, Giovanni Battista Rota, who also acted
as an art dealer.4 Most of these came from the gallery of the last Duke of Mantua,
Ferdinando Carlo Gonzaga, many of whose belongings turned up on the Venetian art
market after his exile and death in Padua following the Austrian occupation of his state
in 1706. The sculptures included a bas-relief by Puget of the Assumption of the Virgin
which was highly valued, and among the pictures were many attributed to Raphael,
Correggio, Giorgione and particularly to Giulio Romano and Castiglione, both of
whom had been much employed by the Gonzaga in happier days. Unlike Smith,
Schulenburg showed a notable interest in contemporary Venetian sculpture, and among
the works he bought from other collectors and sometimes commissioned were a large
group of bronzes by Bertos (including an equestrian portrait of himself) and marbles by
-Corradini (including a modello of the statue of himself which the Republic had com­
missioned for the island of Corfu). His taste in old master paintings, as far as can be
seen from the list of his purchases, was conventional except for the very extraordinary
inclusion of a picture claimed to be by Giotto.
His relations with contemporary artists are of much greater interest. The first with
whom he came into touch seems to have been Gian Antonio Guardi who worked for
him for some fifteen years from before 1730 until 1745.® Guardi received a monthly
salary from Schulenburg and was clearly looked upon by him not so much as an
1 Biblioteca Marciana, Venice: It. VU, 480 (7785), cc. 234-264.
2 Haskell, 1956, p. 298.
Keysler, III, p. 296, writes of Schulenburg’s collection: ‘Some pieces by Castiglione deserve particular
notice, together with the last siege and new fortifications of Corfu, which are not only represented in
paintings but there is likewise a model of them cut in wood.’
Canaletto’s painting is described as follows in Schulenburg’s inventory—see p. 313, note 3: ‘Canalera
—I Tableau grand rep:te la Perspective de Corfu pend.t le Siege fait des Turcs dans l’Année 1716 avec la
Perspective de son Canal, une partie de l’Ile et de la Terre ferme Ottomane, outre les deux Armées
Navales, savoir la Vénitienne, et l’ottomane tirée en file.’ Many other models and pictures of Corfu are
recorded in the inventory.
For some of Schulenburg’s portraits see Morassi, 1952, pp. 85-91.
3 See, for instance, his dealings with Pitteri as recorded by G. A. Moschini, 1924, p. 93.
4 See the manuscript inventories of the Schulenburg collection between 1724 and 1737 in the
Staatsarchiv, Hanover. Edward Wright, I, p. 78, referred to the Puget and an ‘abundance of other fine
things’ from the Duke of Mantua’s collection as belonging to Rota.
8 Morassi, i960, pp. 147-64 and 199-212.

--- [Page 15] ---

Plate 53
ECINEV
YRUTNEC-HTNEETHGIE
NI
SNORTAP
NAMREG
tiertS
dnumsigiS
:inocimA
.b
grubneluhcS
lahsraM
:attezzaiP
.i

--- [Page 16] ---

Plate 54 VENETIAN ART FOR MARSHAL SCHULENBURG
AND CONSUL SMITH (see Plates 54 and 55)
Piazzetta: Idyll

--- [Page 17] ---

Plate 55
a. Canaletto: Dedicatory frontispiece to Etchings
b. Marco Ricci: Village Scene

--- [Page 18] ---

Plate 56
occoR
.S
fo
hcruhC
ta
noitibihxE
erutciP
:ihcseiraM

--- [Page 19] ---

THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS 313
original painter in his own right as a useful copyistand hack. During the whole period
ofhis employment only once—in 1737—was he commissioned to paint history pictures
of his own; and the miserable sum he was then paid (about ten zecchini for the lot)
shows that they must have been small and of little consequence. In general, he was
required to copy masterpieces of the Venetian Cinquecento—Veronese’s Marriage at
Cana in S. Giorgio Maggiore and Madonna and Child with Saints in S. Zaccaria, Tinto­
retto’s Temperance and Fortitude in the Madonna dell’Orto, Bassano’s Nativity in S.
Giorgio Maggiore—and even pictures by his own contemporaries, Sebastiano Ricci,
Piazzetta and Rosalba Camera. His remaining time was spent on churning out an
endless succession of portraits, sometimes as many as six a year, of Schulenburg himself
to be given to his friends and royal admirers, or of those grand connections to be hung
on his own walls. It is not surprising that the quality of those that have survived is
generally low1; only .rarely does the Guardi magic transform an obviously pedestrian
original into a work of authentic beauty, most conspicuously in the little Turkish scenes
copied in 1742 and 1743 from engravings taken from Van Mour—here at last the artist
was given the opportunity to display his talent for delicate and sparkling fantasy.2 There
is a strange irony in the situation. Schulenburg, who was Guardi’s most persistent patron,
wholly failed to appreciate the true nature ofhis gifts except on the one occasion when
he ordered him to paint these idyllic versions of the customs of his most ferocious
enemies.
In fact, the Marshal’s tastes veered in a very different direction. The nucleus ofhis
collection was made up oshistory and genre paintings by Pittoni and Piazzetta.3 During
the ’thirties, when Schulenburg was commissioning pictures from him, Pittoni was
considered to be one of the leading history painters in Venice. Almost alone among his
fellow-citizens he would be asked to contribute a canvas when large-scale international
commissions were being planned for some royal court, and he was already much in
favour with German patrons.4 For Pittoni turned the main episodes of Greek, Roman
and Biblical history into melodramas which represented for his contemporaries the most
acceptable and up-to-date versions of the old Baroque themes. Unlike Tiepolo who
largely confined himself to frescoes, Pittoni rarely painted other than easel pictures and
he was therefore much in demand among collectors. For Schulenburg he produced a
series of pictures illustrating scenes of high Greek and Roman valour and sacrifice—
Scipio and Alexander the Great, Polyxena and Iphigenia.
Piazzetta enjoyed a closer relationship with Schulenburg than any other artist except
Gian Antonio Guardi, and in his case the results of this patronage were wholly beneficial.
For the Marshal must have seen that Piazzetta’s gifts did notdie in scenes of dramatic
1 Apart from those reproduced by Morassi in the above articles see the portrait of Schulenburg
attributed to Gian Antonio Guardi in the Museo Correr, Venice—Pignatti, i960, p. 105.
2 A number of these have turned up in exhibitions and sales during the last few years—see Watson,
i960, pp. 3-13, who now attributes the series to Gian Antonio rather than Francesco Guardi.
3 See the published inventory (n.d.): Inventaire de la Galerie de feu Mgr. le Feldtnarechal Comte de
Schulenburg. This is referred to by Morassi, 1952, pp. 85-91.
4 See Chapter 10.

--- [Page 20] ---

314 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
action of the kind painted by Pittoni, and he therefore employed him on a totally
different type of picture which brought out the very best of this painter’s talents. It was
Piazzetta also who acted as Schulenburg’s chief agent in the purchase of interesting
pictures on the market—usually Flemish.1 For the old Marshal was particularly fond of
Dutch and Flemish painting—a taste that was reflected in the type of patronage he
afforded to Certain Venetian artists. He owned a drawing by Piazzetta of ‘des animaux
et figures à la flamande’ and some twenty heads of men and women by Bartolommeo
Nazari and Giuseppe Nogari in a genre that ultimately looked back to Rembrandt. It
was this taste for Flemish art that encouraged the Marshal to commission naturalistic
painting. Thus Piazzetta painted for him subjects such as a Beggar holding a Rosary, a
Girl with a Basket of Chickens and, above all, the great pastorals or idylls, now in Cologne
and Chicago. The significance of these pictures is not clear. Piazzetta himself who drew
up the inventory of Schulenburg’s collection naturally valued them very highly, but
described them merely as ‘représentant une femme assise au naturel, avec un garçon
entre les Jambes, un panier de raisins en main, des chiens, qui aperçoivent un canard dans
l’eau et deux hommes en distance’ and ‘Une femme avec un parasol, une servante, un
paysans, un garçon qui dort, et la tête d’un bœuf’ (Plate 54). It has been suggested
that the former picture contains a hint of social satire.2 While this is almost certainly
wrong, it does at least make the point that the pictures were probably taken to be far
more ‘realistic’ than our present appreciation of their poetic qualities allows. No
pictures of comparable size showing ordinary people were painted during the eighteenth
century in Venice except on occasion by Piazzetta himself. But perhaps the best reason
for believing that they appealed to a taste for naturalism in the Marshal is that his gallery
contained so many other genre pictures. In particular he owned seven by the provincial
realist Giacomo Ceruti, some of which portrayed beggars and others animals.3 These
pictures alone would suffice to make Schulenburg’s collection unique in Venice; and if
we imagine them hanging in his palace along with his Piazzettas and his various Dutch
and Flemish masters, we can see that the effect must have been strange enough to his
visitors brought up so largely on histories and mythologies.
Like Smith, Schulenburg patronised the vedutisti and landscape painters, but with
one or two important exceptions he owned nothing by Canaletto whose close relations
with the English made it difficult for other residents in Venice to acquire his work.
Instead he owned a view and a number of landscapes by Marieschi, and others by
Carlevarijs, Cimaroli, Joli and especially Marco Ricci and Zuccarelli.4
Schulenburg’s collection of pictures attracted less attention from travellers than did
Smith’s largely because he was constantly sending_crates of them back to his estates in
1 A number of pictures recommended to Schulenburg by Piazzetta, Pittoni and Angelo Trevisani
are recorded in the Archives in Hanover.
2 See White and Sewter, 1959, pp. 96-100.
3 See the published inventory, and for the subsequent sale of these pictures in England, Levey, in
Arte Veneta, 1958, p. 221.
4 There are ten pictures by Marieschi; six by Carlevarijs; four by Cimaroli; two by Joli; nine by
Zuccarelli and six by Marco Ricci.

--- [Page 21] ---

THE FOREIGN RESIDENTS 315
Germany. He began doing this in 1735, and thereafter he sent dozens of pictures on
two or three occasions every year. If we try and reconstruct the collections of the two
men and compare them, we notice several differences. Smith’s was based largely on
Sebastiano Ricci, Rosalba Carriera and Canaletto—all painters who were represented----
rather weakly in Schulenburg’s, though he owned a portrait and some paintings of Ricci
and was on good terms with Rosalba.1 Schulenburg’s collection was rich in works by
Piazzetta, Pittoni and Gian Antonio Guardi, none of whom -was particularly favoured
by Smith. Both men owned works by Marco Ricci and Zuccarelli, though Smith had
a far greater number. Neither had any painting by the finest artist of the age,-Tiepolo.
Smith showed a characteristically English penchant for landscape and views, Schulen­
burg for history, portrait and genre.
— iii — _
SIGISMUND STREIT
Curiously enough a third foreign collector long resident in Venice seems to hold a
position midway between those of the two great patrons who have just been discussed.
A businessman like Smith, a German like Schulenburg and, like him, in close touch
with Frederick the Great, Sigismund Streit owned far fewer pictures than cither—only
forty-eight in all—and made little impact on Venetian society. But some were of good
quality and they seem to reflect so sensitively their owner’s similarities and discrepancies
with Smith and Schulenburg that they are worth discussing here.2
Sigismund Streit was born in Berlin in 1687, the son of a blacksmith, and he came
to Venice in 1709. He soon began to engage in commercial activities which won him a
fortune. He retired in 1750 and four years later he settled in Padua, moving to Venice
only during the winters. He seems to have begun collecting pictures only about ten
years earlier when he was already well past middle age and in 1758 and again in 1763 he
bequeathed those he had acquired to various institutions, especially the Gymnasium
zum Grauen Kloster in Berlin where he had been educated. He died, a bachelor, in 1775
and was buried in the Protestant cemetery of S. Cristoforo.
One of the strongest emotions in Streit’s life was his admiration for Venice, the city
that had transformed his situation and turned him into the rich and complacent figure
who gazes at us from Amigoni’s portrait. He arranged for a yearly speech to be made in
Berlin, in honour of his adopted city, and of the pictures he owned a strikingly high
proportion were painted to celebrate its beauties and traditions. Works of art held a
far more specific and also a far more personal meaning for Streit than they did for more
sophisticated collectors. Of his four Canalettos, two showed scenes which were directly
concerned with his own life, as he pointed out in the long notes which he made about
1 On 28 July 1743 Schulenburg wrote to Rosalba Carriera recommending to ‘di lei amorosa assistenza’
a young woman painter called Angelica GriS—Biblioteca Laurenziana, MSS. Cod. Ashburn. 1781,
Vol. IV, p. 266.
2 For a brief outline of Streit’s career and a list of his pictures with details of their subsequent fate see
Rohrlach, 1951, pp. 198-200. For his position in Venice see Denina, p. 196.

--- [Page 22] ---

316 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
his pictures,1 One portrayed a sweep of the Grand Canal looking south-east from the
Campo S. Sofia to the Rialto. Well in the foreground is a gondola in which stands Streit
himself, while behind can be seen the Palazzo Foscari in which he lived. The other view
was of the Campo di Rialto in which his business activities were carried out.
He was equally keen to have pictures of the ceremonies and festivals of the Repub­
lic. Two more Canalettos, among his very rare night scenes, show the Vigilie di S. Pietro
and di S. Marta, the latter the most popular of all such occasions, and several other
paintings by Canaletto’s followers recorded the Doge taking part in official processions.2
This section of Streit’s collection culminated in an allegorical ‘Glory of Venice’ which
has unfortunately been destroyed. .
Streit shared Schulenburg’s taste for portraits of royalty, and he commissioned his
friend Antoine Pesne to paint Frederick the Great and the Queen .of Prussia. But, above
all, he liked to see representations of himself-and his family. Portraits of his father, his
mother and his sister hung from his walls as well as four of himself (Plate 53b)—not one
of which wholly satisfied him.
Schulenburg was an enthusiastic collector of Pittoni and Piazzetta, Smith of
Sebastiano Ricci—it seems almost inevitable that Streit should have turned to Amigoni,
who painted his portrait and ten other pictures for him between 1739 and 1746.3 Their
subjects were among the most popular of the Old Testament and mythological reper­
toire, but they had none of the glitter or heroic melodrama of Ricci or Pittoni. In them
everything tends to the pastoral or the mildly erotic. Suave and delicate, with no
emotional change of key between Lot and his Daughters and Solomon adoring the Idols or
between Bathsheba and the Sacrifice of Isaac, they were doubtless intended to be soothing
to the eye of the tired businessman. This class of patron has since become much more
familiar; in the early eighteenth century he was still rare.
Streit naturally owned a couple of Zuccarelli landscapes and the odd Dutch picture,
but the only other artist well represented in his collection was Giuseppe Nogari. This
painter was famous above all for his ‘teste di fantasia’—imaginary half-length portraits,
strongly influenced by Northern artists especially Rembrandt, usually of old men and
women. Streit had two of these—an Old man with a Pipe and Tobacco Pouch and an Old
Woman with Glasses, but he also employed Nogari to paint four allegories of Education
and other elevating subjects which were characteristically turned by the artist into
pretexts for rather mawkish genre—a branch of the art which he clearly found more
congenial4 and which, as will be seen in the following chapter, was winning much
support at the time in some of the more ‘progressive’ circles in Venetian society.
1 Streit’s notes on his Canalettos have been published by Zimmermann, pp. 197-224. The Canalettos
have also been discussed by W. G. Constable, 1956, pp. 81-93, who rejects the attribution to Moretti or
some other follower.
2 Zimmermann, pp. 199-203, attributes one of these—the Sala del Maxtor Consiglio—to Gianantonio
and Francesco Guardi.
3 These were the years when Amigoni was in Venice after his visit to England and before that to
Spain. His portrait of Streit, which is published by Zimmermann, was painted when the sitter was aged
52—i.e. in 1739.
4 I am grateful to Mr Hugh Honour for letting me see his photographs of these paintings.