# 17 CHP-17 sec ii

The other great collector who survived the downfall of the Republic but whose name will always be linked to its history was Teodoro Correr.2 He was born in 1750 and except for their common love of art his life and character were different in every way from those of Manfrin. His portrait, painted in early middle age (Plate 59b), shows him to have been elegant and rather withdrawn3 and he was descended from one of the oldest of the Venetian aristocratic families. As a young man he began to show the love of learning that was to characterise his Use. In 1768 he read an elaborate and rather strained paper on ‘The Sacrifices of the Ancients’ to a club to which he belonged: the evening ended on a more congenial note with fencing matches, and odes and sonnets by his friends on the sacrifices ofjuno, Ceres and Minerva.4 In 1776 he embarked on the traditional political career that was expected of one born in his position and within three years he was a member of the Council of Ten. But soon after this he tired of politics and to avoid further responsibilities he became an abate. In 1787 we find him writing to the Doge to explain that his lack of means made it impossible for him to take up his post as governor of Treviso: ‘There is certainly nothing more mortifying for a citizen, Most Serene Prince, than to find himself in such circumstances that he is unable to place himself at the disposal of his fatherland... . .’6 He was to grow accustomed to the situation, for this was only his first of many applications, renewed with every subsequent change of regime, to escape from the duties of official fife. However, there
ibid.,  (5).
IO ' '

[Page 382]
is no doubt that the services which he rendered Venice in other ways were far greater than anything he could have achieved by politics at this stage in the city’s history.
It is impossible to be certain when Correr began to assemble the vast collections which he later left to Venice, but it is probable that he did so when still very young.1
Already he was looking entirely to the past and it seems unlikely that at any stage in his life he commissioned work from living artists.2 We know that he obtained many of his pictures from the great patrician and trading families—especially the Molin, the Orsetti and the Pellegrini—and in his obsessive accumulation of objects he took ruthless advantage of the financial weaknesses of his contemporaries.3 We also find him attending sales and public auctions.4 His aim was to amass everything he could—books, manuscripts, prints, coins, medals and bronzes as well as pictures—which threw light on the history and cultural achievements of his city, and his palace near S. Giovanni Decollato was already-a museum long before his death. Correr’s contemporaries had some doubts about the sureness ofhis taste, and these aspersions were repeated by nineteenth-century writers.8 But this criticism was partly due to the indifference he showed to the more orthodox views ofhis age. He collected works of the fifteenth and eighteenth centuries alike when neither was fashionable—and in the process he sometimes acquired masterpieces of the very highest quality, such as Antonello da Messina’s Deposition and Cosimo
Tura’s Pietà. But it is true that he also owned a good deal of very inferior painting and it is possible to be as struck by how few in number were the great early Renaissance pictures that he picked up as by his adventurousness in buying any at all. In fact, it is almost certain that Correr was more inspired by historical curiosity than by scholarship or aesthetic appreciation.
Of eighteenth-century artists one painter completely dominates the collection—
Pietro Longhi. In view of his passion for Longhi’s ‘documentary’ scenes, it is strange that Correr should have paid no attention whatsoever to the view-painters.6 It almost seems as if he were aware that the physical aspect of the city would remain unaltered but that the ‘douceur de vivre’ had gone for ever. And so he collected his twenty-odd
Longhis to record the family life of the nobles and the street scenes, the stiff little ceremonies of morning chocolate and the portraits of the clergy. He was so pleased with these pictures that he obtained from the artist’s son Alessandro (one of whose portraits he owned) as many drawings by Pietro Longhi as he could lay his hands on.
It was no doubt this love of recording the varied aspects of Venetian life that led him
' 4 For instance, he almost certainly bought Zocchi’s double portrait of A. M. Zanetti and the Marchese
Gerini at the Sasso sale in 1803—sec Haskell, Bollettino dei Musei Civici Veneziani, i960, 3/4, pp. 32-7.

[Page 383]
to buy Gian Antonio Guardi’s excursions into Longhi’s manner—the Parlatorio and the
Ridotto, the gambling room which was closed by the government just as he was beginning his political career.1
The break-up of aristocratic life and collections brought about by the revolution of 1797, followed so soon by foreign occupation, was responsible for many pictures coming on to the market, and Correr obtained a great deal when the Republic had already collapsed. Once again he was careful to avoid committing himself. Under the headings of Liberia and Eguaglianza he wrote to his new democratic rulers that he was unfortunately compelled ‘to resist the violent stimulus of patriotism’ and seek exemption from the Civic Guard owing to general ill-health—and he enclosed certificates from his doctors and dentist to strengthen his case.2 Safely in the background, a crotchety old bachelor, he went on buying well into the nineteenth century, unnoticed in the Venice of Byron and Bonington, and an easy prey to the more unscrupulous second-hand dealers.3 He died at last in 1830 and left the fruits of more than half a century’s avid collecting to his native city—thus worthily ending a tradition of aristocratic interest in the arts that had begun many centuries earlier.

**Footnotes:**
1 Dandolo, p. 97.
2 It is just possible, though it is unlikely, that he obtained the occasional painting direct from Pietro Longhi who died in 1782.
3 Sec the hints in [Urbani de Ghelthof]: Teodoro Correr e il suo museo, n.d. (Biblioteca Correr: Op. P.D. 18796), confirmed by papers in his archives.
5 Dandolo, p. 97.
6 For the sake of accuracy it should be mentioned that he owned one view of Venice attributed to Canaletto, now thought to come from his studio, and one damaged view of Castel Cogolo probably by Francesco Guardi.
1 In view of all the controversy that has surrounded these pictures it is of interest that, although they were catalogued as Longhis by Lazari in 1859, in Correr’s own day they were known to be by ‘Guardi’—Pignatti, i960, p. 96.
2 Biblioteca Correr—Archivio Correr Mal
10 '
3 Levi, I, p. cxix.