# CHP-17



--- [Page 1] ---

Chapter 17
THE LAST PATRONS
- i -
FOR a full generation before the Republic finally collapsed there was a general
feeling that an epoch was drawing to a close. There are countless references to this
in the political speeches and literature of the time, and eventually it began to affect the
patrons and picture collectors. The feeling is embodied in the activities of a number of
men who turned to' the past rather than the present or the future—as if anxious to give
subsequent generations some impression of what Venice had been like in the great days
of her independence.
Girolamo Manfrin was almost the caricature of a type of figure that has at all times
depressed the conservative supporters of an old order.1 He was a nouveau-riche business
man, who through sheer unscrupulous Balzacian energy and talent achieved a high
position in a society where such achievements were despised in favour of the more
gracious attributes of life. Such men have always made their mark, but there are
periods in history when their success appears symbolic of a whole trend. This was to be
the case with Manfrin. He was born in Zara of a humble family—in mezzo al fango, e
dalla Merda nato in the words of one of his aristocratic denigrators2—and he was accused
of all the characteristic evils of the successful businessman—‘iracondo’ incivil, avaro,
ingrato, /Sospettoso, infedel’. In 1769 he was granted a monopoly of the tobacco
plantations in Dalmatia, where he made himself hated and soon acquired an enormous
fortune, much of it through somewhat discreditable means.3 At one stage his willingness
to take bribes and his general financial trickery led to his being banished for fife from
Venice4; but this was revoked, and in 1786 we find him back again with a special permit
to carry arms so as to discourage possible attempts on his life.6 In 1787 he was in a
position to buy the palace of the ancient family of Venier on the Cannaregio, as well as
their country house near Treviso,8 and by then he had already established himself as
one of the most important patrons and collectors in Venice. Indeed, within five years,
1 Most of the available material about Manfrin is still unpublished and ■will be referred to as occasion
arises. The only general account of him and his gallery is given by G. A. Meschini, 1806, II, p. 107.
2 Biblioteca Correr, Venice—Cod. Cicogna 2947/18: Sonetti XVI_ossiano Satire contro il Manfrin,
Impressane di Tabacchi.
8 See, for instance, the pamphlet Risposta alla lettera apologetica impacciale per il Cittadino Gerolamo
Manfrin, In Venezia 1797, Anno I della Libertà Italiana (Biblioteca Marciana: 183.C.89, p. 321). From this
and a mass of similar controversial material it is obvious that Manfrin made himself highly unpopular,
though it is not quite clear to what extent he was actually dishonest.
4 Archivio di Stato, Venice—Inquisitori, 53 8, p. 43—29 Genaro 1770.
6 ibid., 540, p. 6—12 Giugno 1786.
8 Tassini: Curiosità Veneziane, 4th edition 1887.

--- [Page 2] ---

38o PATRONS AND PAINTERS
when a false rumour of his death reached Bologna, the painter and dealer G. A. Armarmi
at once wrote to Giuseppe Maria Sasso in alarm ‘because he is almost the only man in
Venice who spends anything on the fine arts’.1
We first come across Manfrin in this connection in 1785 when the posthumous
edition of Tiepolo’s etchings Varj Capriccj was dedicated to him.2 Two years later there
followed a volume of painters’ portraits3 and thereafter he remained in the forefront
of the Venetian art world until his death in 1802. The vast gallery that he built up was
apparently designed to give a general view of the history of Italian (and, to some extent,
Flemish) painting4—but it is notable that Manfrin took no account of the opinion that
had long been current among scholars that art had something to offer before the six­
teenth century. The Venetian pictures began with Mantegna and Bellini, and thereafter
most of the great and lesser painters were included up to his own contemporaries,
Francesco Guardi, and Gian Domenico Tiepolo.®
In private, at least, Manfrin made few pretensions to connoisseurship. In a letter
to Pietro Edwards, who acted as Iris adviser, he wrote in a strain that has become familiar
through the activities of more recent collectors6: ‘As I wish that everything should
proceed as satisfactorily as possible in the choice of pictures to be included in my
gallery, I naturally wanted real experts in painting, such as yourself and Sig. Gio.
Battista Mingardi, to take over the responsibility of choosing, identifying and excluding
pictures as they think fit, without paying any attention to the expense involved; for I
only wanted pictures of the highest quality in my gallery. ... You must have no
hesitation in being ruthlessly selective—and you need have no fear that your rejection of
any picture will cause you difficulties or hostility; for I entirely accept your terms never
to reveal your objections to a picture, and to keep them entirely private for my own
guidance.’ In Manfrin’s words we see all the snobbishness óf the self-made millionaire;
but in his insistence on a historical choice of pictures we also recognise that the gallery
was to have some of the definitive status of a national institution. It was to be a tribute
to the achievement of Venetian painting—at a time when it was felt that Venetian
painting was virtually at an end.
1 Seminario Patriarcale, Venice—MSS. 566^-Letter of 20 July 1790.
2 Varj capriccj inventati, ed incisi dal celebre Gio. Battista Tiepolo, dedicati allTlLmo S. Girolamo Manfrin,
MDCCLXXXV. 3 Biblioteca Correr, Venice—Stampe D.30.
4 Meschini, 1806, II, p. 107: '. . . egli una Galleria di più camere dì Quadri aperse de’più spetti
- - pennelli, incominciando da’pittori primi ed a’giorni nostri discendendo; ed era di lui pensiero, se la morte
non lo avesse troppo presto mietuto, di offerire di mano in mano tele de’diversi tempi e delle diverse
scuole, perchè vi si potessero a un colpo di occhio riconoscere gli scapiti ed i vantaggi, che nelle varie
età ebbe quest’arte.’ _
5 The first record of Manfrin’s gallery was made by Pietro Edwards, his adviser, just before the end
of the eighteenth century. It exists in manuscript in the Seminario Patriarcale, Venice—MSS. 788.13.
A printed catalogue, made for the sale, was published in 1856—a photographic copy of this exists in the
Biblioteca Correr. A further catalogue of the pictures still remaining in the collection was published by
Ab. G. Nicoletti in 1872 (Biblioteca Marciana: Misc. C. 11231). There is also a manuscript Catalogo delle
Stampe della Collezione annessa alla Galleria Manfrin, Venezia (n.d.), in the Biblioteca Correr: Cod.
Cicogna 3007/XIII.
8 Biblioteca Correr—Epistolario Meschini—published in full in Appendix 7.

--- [Page 3] ---

THE LAST PATRONS 381
The expertise of his advisers combined with Manfrin’s own wealth assembled a
huge collection of over 400 pictures. Many had once been commissioned by important
patrons—there was Batoni’s Triumph of Venice painted for Marco Foscarini—and the
gallery gradually came to be among the finest in Venice. It long remained one of the
chief tourist attractions in the city, and among its treasures was Giorgione’s Tempesta.
Manfrin’s ventures into patronage were less satisfactory. Although this was hardly his
fault, in view of the lack of talented painters available, his activities in this field certainly
seem characteristic of the vulgarian his enemies laughed at. He would organise com­
petitions among the painters to produce pictures on erotic themes which he himself
devised—Joseph and Potiphars Wife, Bathsheba bathing, Lot and his Daughters, Susanna
and the Elders.1 But despite the enthusiasm aroused among history painters starved of
commissions it is hardly this that has entitled him to the gratitude of posterity.
- ii -
The other great collector who survived the downfall of the Republic but whose name
will always be linked to its history was Teodoro Correr.2 He was born in 1750 and
except for their common love of art his life and character were different in every way
from those of Manfrin. His portrait, painted in early middle age (Plate 59b), shows
him to have been elegant and rather withdrawn3 and he was descended from one of the
oldest of the Venetian aristocratic families. As a young man he began to show the love
of learning that was to characterise his Use. In 1768 he read an elaborate and rather
strained paper on ‘The Sacrifices of the Ancients’ to a club to which he belonged: the
evening ended on a more congenial note with fencing matches, and odes and sonnets
by his friends on the sacrifices ofjuno, Ceres and Minerva.4 In 1776 he embarked on the
traditional political career that was expected of one born in his position and within
three years he was a member of the Council of Ten. But soon after this he tired of
politics and to avoid further responsibilities he became an abate. In 1787 we find him
writing to the Doge to explain that his lack of means made it impossible for him to take
up his post as governor of Treviso: ‘There is certainly nothing more mortifying for a
citizen, Most Serene Prince, than to find himself in such circumstances that he is unable
to place himself at the disposal of his fatherland. . . .’6 He was to grow accustomed to
the situation, for this was only his first of many applications, renewed with every
subsequent change of regime, to escape from the duties of official fife. However, there
1 Moschini, 1806, U, p. 107 and the same author, 1810.
2 For Correr and his collections see V. Lazari and the catalogues of-the museum by G. Mariacher,
1957 (until the Renaissance), and T. Pignatti, i960 (seventeenth and eighteenth centuries).
3 By Bernardo Castelli—painted before 1795, in which year it was engraved—see Pignatti, i960,
p. 62.
4 Biblioteca Correr—Archivio Correr ^^ (6 a-d).
° ibid., ^ (5).
IO ' '

--- [Page 4] ---

382 PATRONS AND PAINTERS
is no doubt that the services which he rendered Venice in other ways were far greater
than anything he could have achieved by politics at this stage in the city’s history.
It is impossible to be certain when Correr began to assemble the vast collections
which he later left to Venice, but it is probable that he did so when still very young.1
Already he was looking entirely to the past and it seems unlikely that at any stage in his
life he commissioned work from living artists.2 We know that he obtained many of his
pictures from the great patrician and trading families—especially the Molin, the Orsetti
and the Pellegrini—and in his obsessive accumulation of objects he took ruthless
advantage of the financial weaknesses of his contemporaries.3 We also find him attend­
ing sales and public auctions.4 His aim was to amass everything he could—books, manu­
scripts, prints, coins, medals and bronzes as well as pictures—which threw light on the
history and cultural achievements of his city, and his palace near S. Giovanni Decollato
was already-a museum long before his death. Correr’s contemporaries had some doubts
about the sureness ofhis taste, and these aspersions were repeated by nineteenth-century
writers.8 But this criticism was partly due to the indifference he showed to the more
orthodox views ofhis age. He collected works of the fifteenth and eighteenth centuries
alike when neither was fashionable—and in the process he sometimes acquired master­
pieces of the very highest quality, such as Antonello da Messina’s Deposition and Cosimo
Tura’s Pietà. But it is true that he also owned a good deal of very inferior painting and
it is possible to be as struck by how few in number were the great early Renaissance
pictures that he picked up as by his adventurousness in buying any at all. In fact, it is
almost certain that Correr was more inspired by historical curiosity than by scholarship
or aesthetic appreciation.
Of eighteenth-century artists one painter completely dominates the collection—
Pietro Longhi. In view of his passion for Longhi’s ‘documentary’ scenes, it is strange
that Correr should have paid no attention whatsoever to the view-painters.6 It almost
seems as if he were aware that the physical aspect of the city would remain unaltered
but that the ‘douceur de vivre’ had gone for ever. And so he collected his twenty-odd
Longhis to record the family life of the nobles and the street scenes, the stiff little
ceremonies of morning chocolate and the portraits of the clergy. He was so pleased
with these pictures that he obtained from the artist’s son Alessandro (one of whose
portraits he owned) as many drawings by Pietro Longhi as he could lay his hands on.
It was no doubt this love of recording the varied aspects of Venetian life that led him
1 Dandolo, p. 97.
2 It is just possible, though it is unlikely, that he obtained the occasional painting direct from Pietro
Longhi who died in 1782.
3 Sec the hints in [Urbani de Ghelthof]: Teodoro Correr e il suo museo, n.d. (Biblioteca Correr:
Op. P.D. 18796), confirmed by papers in his archives.
' 4 For instance, he almost certainly bought Zocchi’s double portrait of A. M. Zanetti and the Marchese
Gerini at the Sasso sale in 1803—sec Haskell, Bollettino dei Musei Civici Veneziani, i960, 3/4, pp. 32-7.
5 Dandolo, p. 97.
6 For the sake of accuracy it should be mentioned that he owned one view of Venice attributed to
Canaletto, now thought to come from his studio, and one damaged view of Castel Cogolo probably by
Francesco Guardi.

--- [Page 5] ---

THE LAST PATRONS 383
to buy Gian Antonio Guardi’s excursions into Longhi’s manner—the Parlatorio and the
Ridotto, the gambling room which was closed by the government just as he was begin­
ning his political career.1
The break-up of aristocratic life and collections brought about by the revolution
of 1797, followed so soon by foreign occupation, was responsible for many pictures
coming on to the market, and Correr obtained a great deal when the Republic had
already collapsed. Once again he was careful to avoid committing himself. Under the
headings of Liberia and Eguaglianza he wrote to his new democratic rulers that he was
unfortunately compelled ‘to resist the violent stimulus of patriotism’ and seek exemption
from the Civic Guard owing to general ill-health—and he enclosed certificates from his
doctors and dentist to strengthen his case.2 Safely in the background, a crotchety old
bachelor, he went on buying well into the nineteenth century, unnoticed in the Venice
of Byron and Bonington, and an easy prey to the more unscrupulous second-hand
dealers.3 He died at last in 1830 and left the fruits of more than half a century’s avid
collecting to his native city—thus worthily ending a tradition of aristocratic interest in
the arts that had begun many centuries earlier.
1 In view of all the controversy that has surrounded these pictures it is of interest that, although
they were catalogued as Longhis by Lazari in 1859, in Correr’s own day they were known to be by
‘Guardi’—Pignatti, i960, p. 96.
2 Biblioteca Correr—Archivio Correr Mal
10 '
3 Levi, I, p. cxix.