# 17 CHP-17 sec i

OR a full generation before the Republic finally collapsed there was a general
Ffeeling that an epoch was drawing to a close. There are countless references to this in the political speeches and literature of the time, and eventually it began to affect the patrons and picture collectors. The feeling is embodied in the activities of a number of men who turned to' the past rather than the present or the future—as if anxious to give subsequent generations some impression of what Venice had been like in the great days of her independence.
Girolamo Manfrin was almost the caricature of a type of figure that has at all times depressed the conservative supporters of an old order.1 He was a nouveau-riche business man, who through sheer unscrupulous Balzacian energy and talent achieved a high position in a society where such achievements were despised in favour of the more gracious attributes of life. Such men have always made their mark, but there are periods in history when their success appears symbolic of a whole trend. This was to be the case with Manfrin. He was born in Zara of a humble family—in mezzo al fango, e dalla Merda nato in the words of one of his aristocratic denigrators2—and he was accused of all the characteristic evils of the successful businessman—‘iracondo’ incivil, avaro, ingrato, /Sospettoso, infedel’. In 1769 he was granted a monopoly of the tobacco plantations in Dalmatia, where he made himself hated and soon acquired an enormous fortune, much of it through somewhat discreditable means.3 At one stage his willingness to take bribes and his general financial trickery led to his being banished for fife from
Venice4; but this was revoked, and in 1786 we find him back again with a special permit to carry arms so as to discourage possible attempts on his life.6 In 1787 he was in a position to buy the palace of the ancient family of Venier on the Cannaregio, as well as their country house near Treviso,8 and by then he had already established himself as one of the most important patrons and collectors in Venice. Indeed, within five years,

[Page 3]
when a false rumour of his death reached Bologna, the painter and dealer G. A. Armarmi at once wrote to Giuseppe Maria Sasso in alarm ‘because he is almost the only man in
Venice who spends anything on the fine arts’.1
We first come across Manfrin in this connection in 1785 when the posthumous edition of Tiepolo’s etchings Varj Capriccj was dedicated to him.2 Two years later there followed a volume of painters’ portraits3 and thereafter he remained in the forefront of the Venetian art world until his death in 1802. The vast gallery that he built up was apparently designed to give a general view of the history of Italian (and, to some extent,
Flemish) painting4—but it is notable that Manfrin took no account of the opinion that had long been current among scholars that art had something to offer before the sixteenth century. The Venetian pictures began with Mantegna and Bellini, and thereafter most of the great and lesser painters were included up to his own contemporaries,
Francesco Guardi, and Gian Domenico Tiepolo.
In private, at least, Manfrin made few pretensions to connoisseurship. In a letter to Pietro Edwards, who acted as his adviser, he wrote in a strain that has become familiar through the activities of more recent collectors6: ‘As I wish that everything should proceed as satisfactorily as possible in the choice of pictures to be included in my gallery, I naturally wanted real experts in painting, such as yourself and Sig. Gio.
Battista Mingardi, to take over the responsibility of choosing, identifying and excluding pictures as they think fit, without paying any attention to the expense involved; for I only wanted pictures of the highest quality in my gallery..... You must have no hesitation in being ruthlessly selective—and you need have no fear that your rejection of any picture will cause you difficulties or hostility; for I entirely accept your terms never to reveal your objections to a picture, and to keep them entirely private for my own guidance.’ In Manfrin’s words we see all the snobbishness óf the self-made millionaire; but in his insistence on a historical choice of pictures we also recognise that the gallery was to have some of the definitive status of a national institution. It was to be a tribute to the achievement of Venetian painting—at a time when it was felt that Venetian painting was virtually at an end.
A printed catalogue, made for the sale, was published in 1856—a photographic copy of this exists in the
Biblioteca Correr. A further catalogue of the pictures still remaining in the collection was published by
Ab. G. Nicoletti in 1872 (Biblioteca Marciana: Misc. C. 11231). There is also a manuscript Catalogo delle
Stampe della Collezione annessa alla Galleria Manfrin, Venezia (n.d.), in the Biblioteca Correr: Cod.
Cicogna 3007/XIII.

[Page 381]
The expertise of his advisers combined with Manfrin’s own wealth assembled a huge collection of over 400 pictures. Many had once been commissioned by important patrons—there was Batoni’s Triumph of Venice painted for Marco Foscarini—and the gallery gradually came to be among the finest in Venice. It long remained one of the chief tourist attractions in the city, and among its treasures was Giorgione’s Tempesta.
Manfrin’s ventures into patronage were less satisfactory. Although this was hardly his fault, in view of the lack of talented painters available, his activities in this field certainly seem characteristic of the vulgarian his enemies laughed at. He would organise competitions among the painters to produce pictures on erotic themes which he himself devised—Joseph and Potiphars Wife, Bathsheba bathing, Lot and his Daughters, Susanna and the Elders.1 But despite the enthusiasm aroused among history painters starved of commissions it is hardly this that has entitled him to the gratitude of posterity.

**Footnotes:**
1 Seminario Patriarcale, Venice—MSS. 566-Letter of 20 July 1790.
2 Varj capriccj inventati, ed incisi dal celebre Gio. Battista Tiepolo, dedicati allTlLmo S. Girolamo Manfrin, MDCCLXXXV. 3 Biblioteca Correr, Venice—Stampe D.30.
4 Meschini, 1806, II, p. 107: '. . . egli una Galleria di più camere dì Quadri aperse de’più spetti - - pennelli, incominciando da’pittori primi ed a’giorni nostri discendendo; ed era di lui pensiero, se la morte non lo avesse troppo presto mietuto, di offerire di mano in mano tele de’diversi tempi e delle diverse scuole, perchè vi si potessero a un colpo di occhio riconoscere gli scapiti ed i vantaggi, che nelle varie età ebbe quest’arte.’
5 The first record of Manfrin’s gallery was made by Pietro Edwards, his adviser, just before the end of the eighteenth century. It exists in manuscript in the Seminario Patriarcale, Venice—MSS. 788.13.
8 Biblioteca Correr—Epistolario Meschini—published in full in Appendix 7.
1 Moschini, 1806, U, p. 107 and the same author, 1810.
2 For Correr and his collections see V. Lazari and the catalogues of-the museum by G. Mariacher, 1957 (until the Renaissance), and T. Pignatti, i960 (seventeenth and eighteenth centuries).
3 By Bernardo Castelli—painted before 1795, in which year it was engraved—see Pignatti, i960, p. 62.
4 Biblioteca Correr—Archivio Correr  (6 a-d).